## GOD

> Our belief in God is really fundamental to our belief about everything else. And so, if you think in terms of the worldview, God is at the center, and everything else is as it is because of its relation to him. And that puts God-centered thinking on a different wavelength altogether from the way of thinking that’s usual in our culture, which is self-centered, me-centered, and then concerned with how everything else, including God himself, relates to me. And that is utterly contrary to the Bible way of looking at things, I think, I dare say, utterly contrary to God’s own way of looking at things, as Scripture reveals it. So, in ministry today, it’s very important to challenge me-centeredness, which is so natural to us, and to try and put God-centeredness and a God-centered worldview in place of the me-centered perspective. 
> 
> —	Dr. J. I. Packer

We will consider the basic idea of God as he is presented in Scripture by looking at two subjects. On the one hand, we will explore what theologians often call “the singularity of God,” the fact that he is the only God that exists. And on the other hand, we will focus on the simplicity of God, noting that he really is only one God, despite the fact that he has three persons. Let’s begin with God’s singularity, the doctrine that the God of the Bible is the one and only true God.



### SINGULARITY

As we explore God’s singularity, we will look first at the polytheism that was prevalent in the world during the early centuries of the church. Second, we will explore monotheism as the affirmation of a single god. And third, we will speak of Christianity and its conception of God. Let’s turn first to the topic of polytheism.


#### Polytheism

Polytheism is belief in the existence of multiple gods — powerful supernatural beings that control the universe. Some such gods are thought to be eternal, uncreated beings, while others are thought to have been born or even created in some fashion. In polytheistic systems, the gods are often distinct from one another, and therefore unique in some sense, just as individual human beings are all unique. But in polytheism, no one god can claim to be the only supernatural being who exercises significant control over the universe.
One popular type of polytheism, known as henotheism, expressed primary dedication to one god without denying the existence of other gods. For example, some people in the Roman Empire honored Zeus as supreme while still acknowledging other gods.
In the world of the early church, most non-Christians were polytheists. Many believed in the false gods of the Greeks and Romans, while others worshipped the idols of the ancient Near East. There were also polytheists who believed in cosmic powers, and some who worshipped the elements or other aspects of creation. Atheism — the belief that no gods exist — was rare.
One reason that belief in various gods was so common was that polytheism was often required by law. For example, in the Roman Empire, the government enforced the worship of the Roman gods. The Romans required this worship in order to gain the gods’ favor and protection for the Empire. But a more basic reason for the belief in various gods was the sinfulness of human beings. 

>  The Bible indicates that humans are very prone to turn away from the true God to false gods. This has to do especially with the Bible’s doctrine of sin. It doesn’t have to do as much with the fact that we are creatures in relation to the great creator but rather that we are sinful creatures in relation to God. Sin acts in such a way as to actually blind us even with regard to the truth of God as God has revealed it to us in creation. And so, left to ourselves we will in fact identify as God or identify as divine qualities those things that are not true of God at all. In other words, we will create gods of our own imagination as substitutes for the true God. 
> 
> —	Dr. David R. Bauer

As Scripture teaches, all people know deep down in their hearts that the universe could not possibly have come about without the hand of a divine creator. But in our sin, human beings do not naturally acknowledge the true God and credit him for these things. Instead, we attribute his work to other sources. Listen to the way Paul talked about this in Romans 1:20-23:

> Since the creation of the world God's invisible qualities — his eternal power and divine nature — have been clearly seen, being understood from what has been made, so that men are without excuse. For although they knew God, they neither glorified him as God nor gave thanks to him, but their thinking became futile and their foolish hearts were darkened... [They] exchanged the glory of the immortal God for images made to look like mortal man and birds and animals and reptiles (Romans 1:20-23).

According to Paul, the existence of the God of Scripture is obvious to everyone — it is clearly seen and understood. Paul even went so far as to say that human beings knew God through his self-revelation in creation. But we are so sinful that we refused to glorify him or to give him thanks. Instead, we exchanged his glory for false gods that we invented and worshiped in his place.

> The Bible tells us that all men and women and children know God deep down in their hearts, in their minds, and in their consciences. But Romans 1 tells us that ever since Adam and Eve sinned, that we have turned in the depths of our hearts from worshiping the true God to worshiping idols or anything that’s created by God. And so, the human heart is practically a factory, a source, the root of all kinds of idols. 
> 
> —	Dr. Samuel Ling

With this picture of polytheism in mind, we are ready to explore monotheism, the belief that only one god exists.


#### Monotheism
	
Technically speaking, monotheism can refer to any religion that affirms belief in only one god. For example, in the modern world Judaism, Christianity and Islam are all monotheistic religions because they all insist that there is one and only one divine being.
Many passages in Scripture assert God’s singularity by explicitly stating that there is only one God. Listen to just a few examples. In 1 Kings 8:60, Solomon proclaimed:

> The Lord is God ... there is no other (1 Kings 8:60).
 
In Psalm 86:10, David sang to the Lord:

> You alone are God (Psalm 86:10).

In 2 Kings 19:19, Hezekiah prayed:

> You alone, O Lord, are God (2 Kings 19:19).

In Romans 3:30, Paul insisted:

> There is only one God (Romans 3:30).

And in James 2:19, James said:

> You believe that there is one God. Good! (James 2:19).

There is only one divine being. This was true in the days of the Old Testament. It was true in the days of the New Testament. It was true in the early centuries of the church. And it is still true today.
Now, we need to point out that not all monotheistic religions worship the same god. As we have said, Judaism, Christianity and Islam each worship only one god. And more than this, they all identify this one god as the God of Abraham, at least in name. But the concepts they attach to the name “God of Abraham” are very different. They disagree over his character, his divine actions, and even over his very nature.
Consider Judaism. Judaism bases its faith on the Old Testament, which Christians also do. But they deny the Trinitarian God that the Bible reveals. In fact, they deny each person of the Trinity. They reject Jesus as Lord and God incarnate. They deny that the Holy Spirit is a divine person. And by rejecting Jesus and the Holy Spirit, they deny the Father who sent them. As Jesus himself said in Luke 10:16:

> He who rejects me rejects him who sent me (Luke 10:16).

Judaism rejects Jesus and the Holy Spirit, and thereby also the Father. 
Judaism believes that it worships God as he is revealed in the Old Testament. It points to the same Old Testament that Christians love and says, “We worship that God.” So, superficially, there is a sense in which we can say that we worship the same God. But there is another sense in which their god is different from ours because they have rejected the fuller revelation of God in Jesus. 
And when we consider Islam, it is even clearer that their concept of God contradicts the Bible.

> An important question is: what does the Islamic faith claim regarding the concept of one God? I believe that Islam affirms a type of unity within God, but Christianity attributes different characteristics and attributes to the Lord than Islam does. We have the doctrines of redemption and incarnation, and those are important doctrines that highlight our Lord’s character in a clear, fundamental way in people’s lives. Both redemption and incarnation are absent from the Muslims’ understanding of God’s unity. 
> 
> —	Dr. Riad Kassis, translation


> Islam’s conception of God does indeed contradict the Bible, and one of the most significant ways in which it contradicts the Bible is in the assertion that God is an undifferentiated monad. In Islam, if I can explain that technical term, God is absolutely one and there is no community of being within him. In Christian theology there is an absolute fidelity to monotheism, the belief that there is only one God. The very earliest creed of the Bible is, “Hear O Israel, the Lord your God, the Lord is one.” So, an emphatic assertion of monotheism has been a part of the Judeo-Christian theological tradition from its very fountainhead. And so, Christians are monotheists. Now many of our Islamic friends don’t think that we are. They will think that we’re tri-theists. And they will actually think that you believe in the father, and the mother, and the son, because Mohammed was mistaken in this regard in his understanding of the Christian doctrine of God. But that Christian doctrine of the Trinity — that the one God eternally exists in three persons, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, who are not simply different modes of expression of one deity nor are they simply three different metaphors for the one God, but that there is a real and substantial fellowship between persons in that one true God — that is a radically different conception of God than Islam has.
> 
> —	Dr. J Ligon Duncan III

So, Judaism, Christianity and Islam are all monotheistic religions. They are all distinct from polytheism because they deny that multiple gods exist. But they are also clearly distinct from one another because of their very different doctrines of who God is.
Having looked at polytheism and monotheism, we are ready to describe the conception of God affirmed by Christianity and taught in the Apostles’ Creed.

