### Christianity
	
The statement about God in the Apostles’ Creed is fairly plain. It simply says:

> I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth. 

You’ll notice that the creed does not explicitly say that there is only one God. If we did not know the origin of the creed, it might be possible to read these words as proclaiming faith in the god of Judaism, or the god of Islam. Or even as affirming one god among many. So, how do we know that it is talking about the triune God of Christianity in contrast to non-Christian monotheism and polytheism? 
On the one hand, the creed denies non-Christian monotheism through other things that it says plainly about God. As we saw in a prior lesson, the creed is organized around a Trinitarian formula. It reflects the belief that God the Father, Jesus Christ, his only Son and the Holy Spirit are three different persons in the Godhead, all sharing the same singular divine essence.
Again, recall that the creed was intended to be a summary of beliefs, not a comprehensive statement of faith. And when it was used in the church’s liturgy, everyone in the church knew that to mention these three persons of God in this way was to imply the doctrine of the Trinity. 
On the other hand, the creed denies polytheism by using the singular form of the generic word “god” as a divine name. 
The word “god” can mean many things. Many religions refer to their deities as “gods.” And the Bible itself sometimes uses the word “god” to refer to things like demons, idols, and perhaps even human leaders. But these so-called “gods” also tend to have actual names. For instance, in the religion of ancient Rome, Mars was the god of war, Neptune was the god of the sea, and Jupiter was the leader of the gods. 
In the same way, the God of Scripture is known by actual names. Most of them are descriptive, such as El Shaddai, which is often translated “Almighty God,” meaning the God who is all powerful; and El Elyon, which is usually translated “God Most High,” meaning the God who rules over all; and Adonai, which is generally translated “Lord,” and means master or ruler. 
But the name that most closely approximates what we might think of as God’s proper name is Yahweh. In older translations it appears as Jehovah. But in modern translations, it is generally rendered “Lord,” though its meaning is quite different from Adonai. 
God revealed himself by the name Yahweh extremely early in human history. For instance, human beings were using this name for God at least as early as the days of Seth, the son of Adam, as we learn in Genesis 4:26. Noah referred to God as Yahweh in Genesis 9:26. And Abraham called God by this name in Genesis 12:8.
Yahweh is also the name that God described to Moses in Exodus 3:13-14, where we read this account:

> Moses said to God, “Suppose I go to the Israelites and say to them, ‘The God of your fathers has sent me to you,’ and they ask me, ‘What is his name?’ Then what shall I tell them?” God said to Moses, “I AM WHO I AM. This is what you are to say to the Israelites: ‘I AM has sent me to you.’” (Exodus 3:13-14).

The name Yahweh is related to the Hebrew word ’ehyeh, which is here translated “I AM.” It is the most intimate name that God revealed to his people, and the one that, more than any other name, distinguishes him from all the false gods.
In fact, of all the names by which the Lord is called in Scripture, “God” is the most generic. In our modern Old Testaments, the word God usually translates the Hebrew word el or elohim. And in the New Testament, it usually translates the Greek word theos. But in the days of the Bible, other religions used these same words to refer to their own gods. So, why did the Apostles’ Creed choose this generic name for God instead of a more distinctive name like Yahweh? Because by using the simple term “God” to identify the Lord, the Apostles’ Creed indicates that the God of Christianity is the only one who deserves to be called “God.” As we read in 1 Kings 8:60:

> The Lord (or in Hebrew Yahweh) is God...there is no other (1 Kings 8:60). 

Yes, other religions believe that they worship actual gods. But in reality, they worship imaginary beings, or even demons — inferior, created spirits who are ruled by the Christian God. Paul made this clear in 1 Corinthians 10:20, where he wrote these words:

> The sacrifices of pagans are offered to demons, not to God (1 Corinthians 10:20).

The pagans did not believe they offered their sacrifices to demons; they believed they offered them to various gods. But they were wrong. 
There are many religions besides Christianity in the world today. There is Hinduism, Shinto, paganism, Wicca, Islam, Judaism, tribal religions, and so on. But their gods are false. Some worship demons. Some worship the creation. And some worship figments of their imagination. But the Bible insists that only the Christian God is truly divine; only the Christian God will judge the world; and only the Christian God has the power to save us.
In its first article of faith, the Apostles’ Creed calls new Christians to abandon the false gods they used to worship, and to acknowledge the God of Scripture as the one true God. And this call reflects a teaching that is absolutely essential in Scripture. The Bible obligates every person in every age to acknowledge that the God of the Old and New Testaments is the only true God. And it demands that they worship only him.
Now that we have looked at God’s singularity, we are ready to focus on his simplicity, the unity of his nature or essence.


### SIMPLICITY
	
You will recall that when we defined the doctrine of the Trinity in a prior lesson, we stated it this way: God has three persons, but only one essence. We also said that the term “person” refers to a distinct, self-aware personality, and that the term “essence” refers to God's fundamental nature, or the substance of which he consists. Well, when we speak of God’s simplicity, it is his essence that we have in mind — his fundamental nature, the substance that makes up his being.
Now, theologians use terms like “simple” and “simplicity” in a rather technical way. We are not saying that God is simple in the sense that he is easy to understand. Instead, we mean that his essence is not a composite of different substances but a unified whole consisting of only one substance.
We can illustrate this idea of simplicity by comparing pure water to mud. On the one hand, water may be viewed as a simple substance. It is composed entirely of water, and nothing else. But if we add dirt to our pure water, it turns into mud. Mud is a complex substance because it is composed of two distinct parts: water and dirt. God’s essence is like absolutely pure water: it is composed of only one substance. 
But why is this important? Why does Christianity emphasize that God is simple and not composed of different substances? To answer this question, let’s look once more at the doctrine of the Trinity. The doctrine of the Trinity states that: God has three persons, but only one essence.

> Central to the Doctrine of the Trinity is the distinction between person and essence. God is one with respect to essence and three with respect to person. In fact, we might say that with God, there is one “what” and three “whos.” 
> 
> —	Dr. Keith Johnson

As strongly as the Bible insists that God has three persons — the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit — it also insists that there is only one God. And very early in the life of the church, theologians determined that a useful way to talk about there being only one God was to speak in terms of his essence or substance. So, when they said that God has a simple, unified essence, they were denying that the Father, Son and Holy Spirit were three separate Gods that somehow joined together in the Trinity. And instead, they were affirming that these three persons had always existed together as only one God. 
In this way, the church made it absolutely clear that Christians do not believe in three Gods, as we are often accused by other religions. Instead, we believe in only one God — one divine being — who exists in three persons. 

> Often, in speaking with Muslims, they say the Christian view of the Trinity is an affirmation of three Gods or tri-theism. Nobody in the history of the church has ever affirmed this because alongside the affirmation that the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Spirit is God, is from Genesis to Revelation, the affirmation that God is one. There is one living and true God. So that the only way that we can make sense of the full revelation of God is to say, there is one God, there is no other; the Father, Son and Spirit share in that one Godhead. The language of the church has been they subsist in that one Godhead as three persons and that is why we do not affirm that there are three gods. One God, yet in three persons. That which is taught in Scripture, affirmed by the Church and distinguishes us really from all of our religious competitors in that fashion.
> 
> —	 Dr. Stephen J. Wellum


This idea is stated explicitly in another ancient creed — the Nicene Creed — which says:

> Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son of God ... [is] of one substance with the Father.

Because the Apostles’ Creed is more basic than the Nicene Creed, it does not mention this detail explicitly. Nevertheless, it implies this idea by insisting that we believe in only one God who exists in three persons.
The fact that Christians believe in one God in three persons has countless implications for the Christian life. For example, traditional Christian worship has always been fully Trinitarian: we worship all three persons of the Trinity, and we offer songs of praise and prayers of petition to each one of them. To neglect any person of the Trinity in favor of another is to neglect God himself. We owe honor, service and love to the Father, to the Son and to the Holy Spirit because they are all one God. 
Having addressed the basic Christian conception of God and the nature of his existence, we are ready to focus on the phrase Father Almighty, looking at the distinct things the Bible teaches us about God the Father, the first person of the Trinity.
