#### King
	
In the ancient Near-East, it was common for people to refer to human kings as their fathers, and for kings to refer to their people as their children. This language is often reflected in Scripture, as well. For example, the Israelites referred to David as their father because he had been their king. Of course, some of the Israelites were direct descendants of David, so he was their forefather in a literal sense. But when the nation as a whole referred to David as their father, they meant that he was their king. Listen to Mark 11:10, where the crowds cried out in this way:

> Blessed is the coming kingdom of our father David! (Mark 11:10).

Here, David’s fatherhood over Israel is explicitly connected to his kingship. Similarly, in Acts 4:25-26, the church praised God with these words:

> You spoke by the Holy Spirit through the mouth of your servant, our father David: “Why do the nations rage and the peoples plot in vain? The kings of the earth take their stand and the rulers gather together against the Lord and against his Anointed One.” (Acts 4:25-26).

Once again, David was called the father of Israel because he was the Lord’s Anointed One, the king who sat on the Lord’s throne and led Israel in battle against enemy nations. But why did the ancients refer to kings as their fathers?

> Kings in the ancient world called themselves “fathers” because they were portraying themselves as paternalistic, that is they were caring for their people, taking care of their needs, protecting them and those kinds of things. Now, in reality, most of that was just propaganda because kings in the ancient world, for the most part served themselves rather than serving their people. But at the same time, when God revealed himself to Israel, he used this common way of thinking about kings as fathers. And in the case of God being our father, our royal father, our imperial father, it’s not propaganda, it’s true. God takes care of us. He provides for us. He protects us like a father would. So, he’s the father of his entire empire, the father of his kingdom. 
> 
> —	Dr. Richard L. Pratt, Jr.

And just as human kings were called the fathers of their nations, God was called “Father” because he was the great king that ruled over all the kings of the world, and because he ruled directly over his chosen nation Israel.
Listen to the way Isaiah 63:15-16 talks about the Lord’s fatherhood:

> Look down from heaven and see from your lofty throne, holy and glorious. Where are your zeal and your might? Your tenderness and compassion are withheld from us. But you are our Father ... you, O Lord, are our Father, our Redeemer from of old is your name (Isaiah 63:15-16).

Here, God is referred to as Father because he sits on the heavenly throne, ruling over all creation in general, and over Israel and Judah in a special way. Specifically, the plea is for the divine king to lead his armies into battle, to redeem his people by defeating their enemies. 
Knowing that our divine king cares for us in the same way that a father cares for his children should give us great confidence and comfort. On our own, we are incapable of standing against the evils of this world. But our divine king loves us like a father, and readily helps us.
In fact, this is one of the ideas Jesus taught in the Lord’s Prayer when he instructed his disciples to pray to “Our Father in heaven.” In this petition of the Lord’s Prayer, God is acknowledged as our Father in heaven. And throughout the Bible, the image of heaven is the same: it is God’s throne room, the place where he sits and rules as king. So, when Jesus told his disciples to pray, “Our Father in heaven,” he meant for them to pray to God as their royal father, the divine king enthroned in heaven. Our confidence that God will give us our daily bread, forgive our sins, keep us from temptation, and deliver us from the evil one is based on the fact that as our loving king, he has both the power and the desire to do these things.
With this understanding of God as creator and king in mind, we are ready to consider his role as family head as an aspect of his fatherhood.


#### Family Head

> One of the interesting things for me is that theology always has pastoral implications. What we believe affects the kind of people that we become, and this is true with respect to God the Father. I think it works both ways — for those of us who have had good fathers, and for those who haven’t. I’m fortunate in having had a good father, so it has never been difficult for me to think of God as my Heavenly Father. All of the things that my dad said to me, and did for me, and the way that we related to each other — that was very, very important, and brings God the father into a very positive sense for me. But over the years I have met and worked with people for whom the language of fatherhood was very negative, very challenging, very difficult. But I remember it one day working with one of my students, who framed it for me in a way that, she said that “God became for me the Father that I never had.” And, so I think that when we explore the fatherhood of God, even from the place of deficiency, we begin to learn that the heart of God is a heart that is disposed towards us, whether or not we have actually had that experience with our earthly fathers.
> 
> —	 Dr. Steve Harper

Everyone is familiar with the concept of a family head. Usually it is a parent, grandparent, or other relative who leads and makes decisions for the family or household. Well, Scripture often describes God’s relationship to his people in these very same terms. 
At times in the Old Testament, we catch glimpses of God as the head of the family of the human race. For example, in Genesis 5:1-3, Moses described God’s relationship to Adam in the same way that he described Adam’s relationship to his son, Seth. 
More often in the Old Testament, though, God is portrayed as the family head of the nation Israel. We see this in the care he takes for his people in places like Deuteronomy 1:31, Psalm 103:13, and Proverbs 3:12. As just one example, consider the Lord’s words in Hosea 11:1:

> When Israel was a child, I loved him, and out of Egypt I called my son (Hosea 11:1). 

Here the Lord portrayed himself as a parent who had loved the nation of Israel since its childhood. We also find God described as Israel’s family head in Numbers 12:7, where the Lord referred to Moses in this way:

> My servant Moses; he is entrusted with all my house (Numbers 12:7, NRSV).

The word translated “house” is the Hebrew term bayit. It is the normal word that referred not only to a domestic building, but also to the people who lived in the building. Here, Moses is described as a son or servant who rules over the people and possessions of the head of the household, implying that God is the family head of the nation of Israel.
Of course, the description of God as the family head of his people also continues in the New Testament. In Matthew 7:9-11, and Luke 11:11-13, Jesus taught that the Father answers our prayers in the same way that human fathers provide for their children. In John 1:12-13, as well as in 1 John 2:29 and 3:1, we learn that the Father loves us because we have been born into his family. And in Hebrews 12:5-10, we read that the Lord disciplines us for our own good in the same way that a human father disciplines his children. And in passages like 1 Timothy 3:15 and 1 Peter 4:17, the church is referred to as God’s household and family.

> I believe there are tremendous pastoral implications of the fatherhood of God. I think one of the things we see right off the bat is: God is Father. I mean, it’s a tremendous look at what the Father is like, what God is like in Scripture. So, we see right from the get-go that family must be very, very important to God. And I believe that right from Deuteronomy 6 when the Lord says, “Listen, this is how I’m going to perpetuate the law and the love of God; it’s going to be through families.” It’s going to be as parents rub shoulders, rub their lives against the lives of the children; tremendous things are done there, obviously. Family is exceedingly important to God. I think also you look down and you see that Fathers are critical to the family. And the pastoral implications there, you can see it all around the world where Fathers are strong, you have strong cultures. Where Fathers become weak in cultures, weak within the cultures, you have a weakening dynamic there that simply cannot be replaced by motherhood. We need strong mothers, no question about it, but fathers are absolutely critical, and I think one of the things you see in the Fatherhood of God is that very dynamic. I see when you have a lack of fatherhood you have abuse that’s on the rise, you have a lack of education, you have crime that’s on the rise. So, this whole thing of dysfunction across the culture happens when you have a weakening concept of fatherhood and that will happen when you have a weak concept of God as Father. 
> 
> —	Dr. Matt Friedeman

Now that we have explored the name, person and fatherhood of the Father Almighty, we are ready to investigate his unlimited power to accomplish his will.


### POWER
	
Look once again at the first article of faith in the Apostles’ Creed. It says:

> I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth. 

When the Apostles’ Creed says that God the Father is almighty, it means that he has unlimited, matchless power. In traditional theological terms, God’s almighty power is referred to as his omnipotence, from the root omni, meaning all, and the word potency, meaning power.
The Father’s power is unlimited because he has the strength and ability to accomplish whatever he chooses. And it is matchless because he is the only one that possesses this type of power. 
We’ll consider both aspects of the Father’s power that we have just mentioned: the fact that it is unlimited, and the fact that it is matchless. Let’s begin with the unlimited nature of his power.


#### Unlimited

Scripture describes the Father as having power to do anything he wills to do. And it demonstrates this unlimited power in many different ways. It speaks of him as having the power to create the universe and to destroy it. It says that he has power to control the weather, to defeat his enemies in battle, to rule and to control human governments, to perform mighty miracles, and to save his people. Listen to how the prophet Jeremiah described the Lord in Jeremiah 10:10-16:

> The Lord is the true God; he is the living God, the eternal King. When he is angry, the earth trembles; the nations cannot endure his wrath... God made the earth by his power; he founded the world by his wisdom and stretched out the heavens by his understanding. When he thunders, the waters in the heavens roar; he makes clouds rise from the ends of the earth. He sends lightning with the rain and brings out the wind from his storehouses... He is the Maker of all things, including Israel, the tribe of his inheritance — the Lord Almighty is his name (Jeremiah 10:10-16).

God ultimately controls every aspect of the created world. He has the power to do whatever he pleases. In Isaiah 46:10-11, the Lord himself summarized his power this way:

> My purpose will stand, and I will do all that I please … What I have said, that will I bring about; what I have planned, that will I do (Isaiah 46:10-11).


God’s omnipotence is a good reminder to us as believers that when the world seems like it’s spinning out of control, feels like it’s descending into chaos, it’s not. God cannot be bound by another source or power superior to his. The world, whatever else it may seem like, the world is not spinning out of control, God is sovereign, we may have confidence that he has not been overpowered, and it gives us strength to walk with faith in those times that appear mysterious to our limited perspective. When we don’t see all that God sees, it is good to know that God has not had his control or his power wrested from him against his will. Whatever is coming to me, whatever is taking place in my life, is taking place under the authority of God’s loving hand. And I can take confidence, even when I can’t explain my circumstances that I know the God who sustains me and walks through this with me. 

—	Dr. Robert G. Lister


Throughout the Bible, Scripture commonly points to God’s redemption of his people as an ideal demonstration of his power. In the Old Testament, we frequently read that he proved his power in the Exodus when he smote the Egyptians with plagues, freed the Israelites from slavery, sustained them with food from heaven for forty years in the desert, and gave them conquest over the Promised Land. In the minds of ancient Israel, the Exodus was the greatest example of God’s redemptive power they knew.
We find references to God’s power in the Exodus throughout the books of the Law, in passages like Exodus 14:31; Numbers 14:13; and Deuteronomy 9:26-29. We also see this theme in every other part of the Old Testament. We find it in the historical books in 2 Kings 17:36; in the poetic books in places like Psalm 66:3-6; and in the prophetic books in places like Isaiah 63:12.
Now, this is not to say that the ancient Israelites ignored the surpassing greatness of the spiritual redemption they received by grace through faith in the Lord. It was perfectly valid for them to say things like, “I believe in God’s power by faith.” But many Old Testament authors found it more compelling to say things like, “God proved his power by single-handedly freeing our entire nation from slavery.” And this should not be surprising. After all, the external demonstrations of God’s might in the Exodus were so irrefutable that even the unbelieving Egyptians were convinced. 
With this understanding of God’s unlimited power in mind, we should pause to mention that there are certain things that God cannot or will not do, despite his unlimited power. Specifically, the Father’s nature governs everything he does. As a result, he never does anything that is contrary to his nature.
Nature is a broad term that includes both essential and personal attributes. We might define it as one’s fundamental character; or the central aspects of one’s being. In the case of the Father, his nature includes not only his being and his character, but also his relationships with the other members of the Trinity. And the Father’s nature is absolutely immutable and unchangeable, so that it will always lead him to exercise his power in similar ways. James 1:17 speaks of the unchangeable quality of God’s nature in this way:

> The Father of the heavenly lights ... does not change like shifting shadows (James 1:17).

The Father’s nature does not limit his ability to do things that are compatible with his nature. But it does guarantee that he will only exercise his almighty power in ways that are consistent with his attributes. For example, he will never cease to be eternal. He will never revoke his authority over the Son and the Holy Spirit. He will never do anything sinful. And he will always keep his promises.

> It’s very interesting to me that one of the factors in the rise of modern science was the recognition that God operates the same way today as he did yesterday. Whereas wherever animism obtains in this world — the belief that there are many gods and that gods reside in the elements of this world, beliefs that God is utterly unpredictable — and if God is utterly unpredictable, you’re not able to study this world because you don’t know if it’ll act this way today and a different way tomorrow. But if God is unchangeable then you can actually go out and study the world and understand how God made it and how it works. And so that very belief in the unchangeability of God enabled the rise of modern science. Well, in the same way that it enabled the rise of modern science, it enables the assurance and the comfort and the peace of a Christian in uncertain circumstances, because we don’t have to figure it all out. We don’t have to know what’s coming around the corner. All we have to know is that our God is completely sufficient to meet any and every challenge that we encounter, and that he will predictably address that situation in the same way he promised to David, to Abraham and to Adam and to Jesus and to Paul — that he’s dependable, that he’s faithful, that he’s not fickle, that he doesn’t change from day to day, and he has every power within himself to address our every circumstance. 
> 
> —	Dr. J. Ligon Duncan III

Now that we have discussed the unlimited nature of the Father’s might, we should turn to its matchless qualities, noting that God alone is omnipotent.


#### Matchless
	
Listen to the way God’s matchless power is described in Isaiah 14:24-27:

> The Lord Almighty has sworn, “Surely, as I have planned, so it will be, and as I have purposed, so it will stand. I will crush the Assyrian in my land; on my mountains I will trample him down. His yoke will be taken from my people, and his burden removed from their shoulders.” This is the plan determined for the whole world; this is the hand stretched out over all nations. For the Lord Almighty has purposed, and who can thwart him? His hand is stretched out, and who can turn it back? (Isaiah 14:24-27).

Notice that in this passage, the description of the Lord’s unlimited power is followed by an assertion that he alone possesses omnipotence. There is no one who can thwart him, no one who can turn back his hand. 
The fact that the Father’s power is matchless flows naturally from the fact that there is only one true God. Certainly, if there were another being of infinite power, God’s status as the only God could be challenged. After all, a being of infinite power would either be divine, or could make himself divine by virtue of his own power.
This is essentially what God told Job in Job 38, when he said that Job would be able to justify himself if he could first do the same powerful acts that God had already done, such as creating, ordering and providentially controlling the universe.
But the reality is that only God is truly divine. And therefore, only God has unlimited power.
Sadly, in our day many well-meaning Christians deny that God is all-powerful. They misunderstand the Scriptures to teach that God himself is doing all he can with his creation. But the omnipotence of God is a wonderfully practical teaching of Scripture. When the people of God are in trouble, they cry out for God’s help because they know that he is able to save. When evil seems to be in control of the world, we can rest assured that God has total power over evil. Without faith in God’s omnipotence, we have no basis for our confidence that God will defeat his enemies, and that his children will receive the eternal blessings he has promised.
It’s amazing to think about all the rich theology that is rolled into the phrase Father Almighty. We serve a powerful, personal, fatherly God that loves us and cares for us in astounding ways. And we can be completely assured that his protection will never fail because we know that he himself will never fail. He will always be our creator, king and family head. He will always have unlimited, matchless power. And he will never change. He will always be there to save us, and the salvation he offers is just as everlasting as he is.
So far in this lesson we have explored the nature of our Trinitarian God, and the characteristics of the divine person known as the Father Almighty. At this point, we are ready to turn to our third topic: the role of the Father as the Maker of heaven and earth.

