## CONCLUSION

In this lesson on God the Father, we have looked closely at the first article of faith in the Apostles’ Creed. We have discussed the concept of God that is implied in this article. We have spoken of the Father Almighty as the first person of the Godhead. And we have explored the Father’s role as the Maker of heaven and earth.
Understanding the person of God the Father is foundational to all Christian theology. Unless we know and worship the true Triune God of Scripture, we are worshiping a false God. And recognizing and honoring the person Scripture calls the Father is a critical part of true worship. The Father is the one that the Son and the Holy Spirit obey and honor — the one whose glory they work to increase. And so, he should be the focus of our obedience, honor and glory as well. 
 
## CONTRIBUTORS

Dr. Van Gayton (Host) is Academic Dean at The Williams Bible Institute and Seminary and has been a renowned Bible teacher and lecturer at a number of distinguished seminaries and universities throughout the world. Dr. Gayton also served as the Chaplain of the Federal Bureau of Prisons for four years and was on the Board of Directors for the Institute of Religion and Public Policy in Washington D.C. Dr. Gayton holds a Master of Theology from International Seminary, a Master of Divinity from Logos Bible College, a Doctor of Bible Philosophy from Christian Leadership University, a Doctor of Theology from Faith Theological Seminary, and a Doctor of Ministry from Reformed Theological Seminary. He was consecrated as a bishop in Apostolic Succession and served as Archbishop of the International Community of Christian Churches, a ministry committed to restoring the historical unity of the Body of Christ.


Dr. David R. Bauer is Dean of the School of Biblical Interpretation and the Ralph Waldo Beeson Professor of Inductive Biblical Studies at Asbury Theological Seminary.

Dr. Steve Blakemore is the Assistant Professor of Philosophy at Wesley Biblical Seminary.

Dr. Paul Chang is the Senior Pastor of Monmouth Chinese Christian Church in Middletown, New Jersey.

Dr. J. Ligon Duncan III is Chancellor and CEO of Reformed Theological Seminary and the John E. Richards Professor of Systematic and Historical Theology.

Dr. Matt Friedeman is Professor of Evangelism and Discipleship at Wesley Biblical Seminary.

Dr. Steve Harper is the founding Vice President of the Florida-Dunnam campus of Asbury Theological Seminary in Orlando, FL, and retired Professor of Spiritual Formation and Wesley Studies.

Dr. Dennis E. Johnson is Professor Emeritus of Practical Theology at Westminster Seminary California.  

Dr. Keith Johnson serves as the National Director of Theological Education for Cru (formerly Campus Crusade for Christ) and is a guest professor of Systematic Theology at Reformed Theological Seminary.

Dr. Riad Kassis is International Director of the International Council for Evangelical Theological Education.

Dr. Samuel Ling is Co-founder of China Horizon.

Dr. Robert G. Lister is Associate Professor of Biblical and Theological Studies at the Talbot School of Theology.

Dr. John Oswalt is the Visiting Distinguished Professor of Old Testament at Asbury Theological Seminary.

Dr. J. I. Packer (1926-2020) was Board of Governors’ Professor of Theology at Regent College in Vancouver, British Columbia and preached and lectured widely in Great Britain and America.

Dr. Richard L. Pratt, Jr. is Co-Founder and President of Third Millennium Ministries. 

Dr. Thomas R. Schreiner is the James Buchanan Harrison Professor of New Testament Interpretation and Associate Dean of Scripture and Interpretation at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.

Dr. Mark L. Strauss is Professor of New Testament at Bethel Seminary, San Diego.

Dr. Derek Thomas is Professor of Systematic and Historical Theology at Reformed Theological Seminary in Atlanta, Georgia.

Rev. Dr. Simon Vibert is Senior Pastor of Christ Church Virginia Water, England, and the former Vice Principal and Director of the School of Preaching at Wycliffe Hall, Oxford.

Dr. Stephen J. Wellum is Professor of Christian Theology at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.

 
## GLOSSARY
 
 
Adonai – Hebrew name of God meaning "Lord," "Master," "Ruler" 

almighty – Adjective meaning "all powerful"; in traditional theological terms, God’s almighty power is referred to as his "omnipotence," from the root omni, meaning “all,” and the word “potency,” meaning “power”

atheism – Belief that there is no God

El Elyon – Biblical name of God meaning "God Most High"

El Shaddai – Biblical name of God meaning "Almighty God"

El/Elohim – Hebrew term meaning "God"

ex nihilo – Latin phrase meaning "out of nothing"

henotheism – Belief in the existence of many gods, but offering special dedication to one primary god

monogenes – Greek word (transliteration) for "one and only"; often translated “only begotten”

 
monotheism – Belief in only one God

nature – One’s fundamental character or the central aspects of one’s being

omnipotence – Almighty and unlimited power

polytheism – Belief in multiple gods

simple/simplicity of God – Theological term used to explain that God's essence is not a composite of different substances, but a unified whole consisting of only one substance

singularity of God – Theological term used in reference to God to mean that he is the only true God

Theos – Greek word (transliteration) for "God"

undifferentiated monad – Technical term for the belief that God is a single indivisible being with no distinction between his persons

Yahweh – Hebrew name for God that comes from the phrase, "I Am that I Am"; often translated "LORD"
