# Study Guide 
# Biblical Foundations
# Module Four – The Old Testament Canon

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for this course’s Final Exam.

**********************************

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 - 21:52

Introduction 

I. Canon as Mirror 

      A. Basis 

  	1. Character of Scripture 

  	2. Biblical Examples 

      B. Focus 

        	1. Doctrines 

  	2. Examples 

  	3. Personal Needs 


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. When the lesson refers to the Old Testament as a “canon,” what does he mean? 

2. Explain the three ways the teaching of the Old Testament comes to the people of God, and explain the metaphor that corresponds to each one.

3. What is the “thematic analysis” of the Old Testament? How can it help us?

4. What arguments justify the “thematic analysis” of the Old Testament? 

5. What kinds of themes can we legitimately study in a biblical passage?

6. Explain how biblical writers refer to characters who were not very admirable examples. What can we learn from them?

7. According to the lesson, what kinds of themes and concerns are appropriate to focus on for thematic analysis (as long as it is done properly)? 
