# The Pentateuch 
### Lesson One Introduction to the Pentateuch
## INTRODUCTION
 
Have you ever wondered how different the Christian faith would be if we didn’t have the Bible? Leaders would pass instructions from one generation to the next, but there would be no way to evaluate their ideas, no standard by which we could judge between differing opinions.
This must have been how it was for many in Israel in the time of Moses. Their
ancestors had passed down accounts of primeval history and their patriarchs. They’d told the story of how God had delivered Israel from Egypt, given them his law, and led them toward the Promised Land. But what were they to believe God was going to do with Israel in their current circumstances, and in the future? How were they to judge between differing opinions on these matters? God answered these kinds of questions by giving them the first five books of the Bible as the standard of their faith, the books we now call the Pentateuch.
This is the first lesson in our series The Pentateuch, and we’ve entitled it, “Introduction to the Pentateuch.” In this lesson we’ll introduce how the biblical books of Genesis to Deuteronomy served as the standard for Israel’s faith.
Our introduction to the Pentateuch will divide into two main parts. First, we’ll describe modern critical approaches to this part of the Bible. These approaches represent the views of interpreters who deny the full authority of Scripture. Second, we’ll explore modern evangelical outlooks, the views of biblical scholars who affirm the full authority of the Bible as the inspired Word of God. Let’s look first at modern critical approaches to the Pentateuch.
### MODERN CRITICAL APPROACHES
 
Although our lessons will go in a different direction, it’s important for us to realize that many, if not most, modern biblical scholars have denied the divine inspiration and authority of the Pentateuch. They’ve also denied the traditional Jewish and Christian view that the Pentateuch came from the days of Moses, Israel’s great lawgiver. So many
commentators, teachers, pastors, and even lay people have endorsed these views that it’s nearly impossible for serious students of Scripture to avoid them. And for this reason, it’s crucial that we have some understanding of how critical scholars have handled this part of the Bible.
> In the last 150 to 200 years, critical scholars have given a great deal of attention to study of the Pentateuch. And although we evangelicals may disagree with many of those approaches, it’s necessary for us to be aware of where many Old Testament scholars are in order that we can respond to their suggestions correctly. We must not simply do our Bible study in a vacuum, as it were, without being aware of what’s going on around us. We need to state our approaches in the light of all that is being said elsewhere.
— Dr. John Oswalt

To understand modern critical approaches to the Pentateuch, we’ll look at three issues: first, some important presuppositions that have influenced critical outlooks; second, critical perspectives on the authorship of the Pentateuch; and third, a number of significant interpretive strategies that critical scholars have pursued. Consider first some
of the presuppositions that influence these approaches.

### PRESUPPOSITIONS

For the most part, modern critical views on this part of the Bible flowed directly from the intellectual currents of the Enlightenment in seventeenth and eighteenth century Western Europe.
For our purposes, we’ll focus on two significant presuppositions that grew out of the Enlightenment. Both of these perspectives have deeply influenced critical interpretations of the Pentateuch. First, we’ll consider the concept of naturalism. And second, we’ll look at presuppositions about the historical development of Israel’s faith. Let’s start with naturalism.

#### Naturalism

In brief, Enlightenment naturalism was the dominant scholarly belief that if spiritual realities existed at all, they had no discernable effect on the visible world. And for this reason, they had no place in academic research. By the middle of the nineteenth century, naturalism dominated every academic field in the West, including studies in the Christian faith. One major effect of naturalism in biblical studies was that well-respected scholars rejected the longstanding Jewish and Christian belief that the Pentateuch was inspired by God. And for this reason, most handled the Pentateuch in the same ways that they handled the religious writings of ancient cultures in general. In this view, the
Pentateuch contains all kinds of errors, contradictions and even intentional misrepresentations of history and false theology, like all other merely human writings.
Interestingly enough, as the presuppositions that led to naturalism freed modern scholars to dismiss the inspiration and authority of the Pentateuch, they also led to certain outlooks on the historical development of Israel’s faith.

#### Historical Development

By the early nineteenth century, naturalism had led to what we may call “naturalistic historicism.” This was the belief that the best way to understand any subject is to understand how it developed over time through natural causes. Nineteenth century biologists devoted themselves to explaining how life on earth originated and evolved through the millennia. Linguists traced the historical developments of human languages. Archeologists reconstructed the ancient backgrounds and advancements of human societies. And scholars in the field of religion gave similar priority to describing the naturalistic, historical evolution of world religions.
By and large, early modern western scholars reconstructed the evolution of world religions to align with their understanding of developments in human society. For
instance, it was commonly assumed that ancient people first formed primitive tribal societies that practiced animism, the belief that objects in nature had spirits associated with them. As time passed, primitive tribal societies formed larger chiefdoms that practiced polytheism, a belief in many gods. As various chiefdoms formed larger confederations, religion began to move from polytheism to henotheism, the belief that one god was greatest among all gods. Finally, with the development of large kingdoms and empires, powerful monarchs and priests often moved their nations from henotheism toward monotheism, belief in one god. And in this naturalistic historical view, it wasn’t until this highly developed stage that the norms of religion began to be codified, or written down. Prior to this time, religion had passed from generation to generation only through oral and ritual traditions.
Now, we should note that later in the twentieth century anthropologists largely discredited the idea that religions evolved in such a simple manner. But these outlooks deeply influenced the ways biblical scholars handled the Pentateuch early in the modern period. And they continue to influence biblical scholarship even today.
> What we call "critical scholarship" often assumes that the Old Testament reflects a development of beliefs from a primitive, less sophisticated form of religion to a more complex, more sophisticated form of religion, the latter being better than the former. There are a couple of things we can say about that. One thing, positively speaking, we can say that there is a progress in how God reveals himself. The Bible shows this, what we call “organic growth,” where doctrines and themes and ideas about God grow from seed to full form, and so the Bible even talks about its own progressive message. And so, yes, there
is a form of progression within the Bible and within the Pentateuch. It’s a movement from the beginnings of God's revelation to the full flowering, if you will, if you can imagine a time-lapse photo of a flower blossoming. But, negatively speaking, critical scholars generally hold an evolutionary or development view of human history which assumes the inevitability of progress... Now, all we have to do is look at the world around us to see that the inevitability of progress is a great myth. Yes, we progress, but also as we progress, we also devolve. So, there’s something about the hubris of the modern that looks upon something older as more inferior, whereas in fact, that is a philosophical assumption, it’s not something that’s found within the Bible itself.
— Rev. Michael J. Glodo

Early modern outlooks on world religions were obviously different from the way the Bible depicts the development of Israel’s faith. The Pentateuch presents Israel’s faith as consistently monotheistic. From Adam and Eve, to Noah, to the patriarchs, to the heads of Israel’s tribes, the faithful worshiped the one true God as the Creator of all. And, as far as we know from Genesis, in these early stages, this true, monotheistic faith was
passed through oral and ritual traditions from one generation to the next.
Then, according to the Pentateuch, a decisive transition took place in the days of
Moses. At this time, the norms of Israel’s faith began to be codified. Moses prepared Israel for nationhood, first by writing down God’s law in the Book of the Covenant and the Ten Commandments, and, as we’ll see later, by composing the rest of the Pentateuch to guide Israel’s faith. So, according to the Bible, Israel’s religion was oriented toward sacred writings from the time of Moses, long before Israel had a king and temple.
As straightforward as this well-known biblical account is, modern criticism considered this timeline impossible due to the assumptions of naturalistic historicism. Modern critical scholars deconstructed the biblical portrait of Israel’s faith. And they reconstructed it to conform to modern ideas of how all primitive religions evolved. In this outlook, Israel’s prehistoric ancestors embraced tribal animism. Then, the patriarchs of Israel moved toward polytheism as their tribes merged together in what amounted to chiefdoms. In this view, if there was a Moses who led Israel out of Egypt, the Israelites he led were little more than a confederation of tribes characterized by henotheism. And, contrary to the Scriptures, critical interpreters believed that, at this stage of social development, it would have been impossible for someone to have written down the standards of Israel’s faith. Such written standards only could have emerged during Israel’s early monarchy, when Israel’s kings and priests sought to regulate Israel’s faith. So, according to critical scholars, it was from the time of the monarchy that Israel’s religion increasingly became a religion of the book.
Now that we’ve touched on the presuppositions of modern critical approaches toward Scripture and the historical development of Israel’s faith, we should turn to a second, closely related issue. How have these outlooks affected critical approaches to the authorship of the Pentateuch?

### AUTHORSHIP

As we’ve seen, critical interpreters believed that Israelite faith only began to be codified in the time of Israel’s monarchs. And of course, this assumption meant that Moses had no involvement in writing the Pentateuch. Rather, these books resulted from a long, complex process that began with ancient oral traditions that were compiled into various documents during the monarchical period. And it was only during and after the time of Israel’s exile that these documents were edited and compiled into the Pentateuch as we now know it. Now, when students of Scripture first hear that many scholars believe in this long history of the Pentateuch’s development, they almost always wonder what evidence supports it.
We’ll look at this approach to the Pentateuch’s authorship by summarizing three of the main evidences offered by critical scholars. We’ll begin with variations in divine names found in the Pentateuch.

#### Divine Names

Early critical interpreters noted that the Pentateuch has a variety of names for God. And they argued that these variations were evidences of a long evolution of Israel’s יםִ לֹהֱא faith. For instance, sometimes the Pentateuch simply uses the Hebrew term (Elohim) or “God.” Other times, God is called ֱהוה (Yahweh) or “the Lord.” The Pentateuch combines these terms with each other and with other terms as well, like “Yahweh Elohim” or “the Lord God,” and “Yahweh Yireh,” or “the Lord provides.” God is also called “El Elyon” or “God Most High,” and “El Shaddai,” often translated “God Almighty.”
Now, it’s important to note that while the Pentateuch does reflect a variety of names for God, this may not have been unusual. Twentieth century research into divine names of other ancient Near Eastern religions has pointed out that the same authors use a variety of names for their gods as well. Still, early critical scholars thought that variations in the names of God in the Pentateuch revealed a long history of composition. They believed that different names for God indicated that one source was added to another and another, and eventually resulted in the Pentateuch.
> When you’re reading through the Old Testament, it doesn’t take you very long to note that there are different names for God. In Genesis 1 the name for God is Elohim. Genesis 2, all of a sudden, you have the name Yahweh. Critical approaches will understand this very differently than an evangelical would. A critical scholar would say these come from different sources... As evangelicals, I think we need to step back and understand the bigger picture. God is Elohim, and he is Yahweh. Elohim is the God Almighty, the one who is over the world, the Creator, the one that all nations of the world would recognize as that higher power, that ultimate figure. But in a covenant relationship with the nation of Israel, he reveals himself in a very personal name, Yahweh. He is the “I Am” who will be for his people and will be with his people. And that is a covenant name because Israel is God's chosen people.
— Dr. David Talley
 
 In addition to variations in divine names, many critical scholars have supported their views on the authorship of the Pentateuch by drawing attention to what they've called “duplicate accounts.”
