#### Duplicate Accounts

It isn’t difficult to see that a number of passages in the Pentateuch resemble each other. But critical interpreters have argued that these passages reflect different oral traditions among different groups of people, and the processes by which these accounts came to be written down in the Pentateuch.
For example, interpreters have often pointed to what they call the “two creation
accounts” in Genesis 1:1–2:3 and Genesis 2:4-25. They’ve also pointed out the similarities between the accounts of Abraham and Isaac when they lied and endangered their wives in Genesis 12:10-20; 20:1-18; and 26:7-11. Both traditional Jewish and Christian interpreters have explained these similarities in reasonable ways. But critical scholars maintain that these accounts represent different oral traditions that were written down and later incorporated into the Pentateuch.
In the third place, critical scholars have pointed to what they consider inconsistencies in the Pentateuch. And they claim that these so-called inconsistencies support their complex reconstructions of this part of the Bible’s authorship.

#### Inconsistencies
For example, they’ve often noted differences between the regulations for Passover in Exodus 12:1-20 and Deuteronomy 16:1-8. And they’ve pointed out variations between the Ten Commandments in Exodus 20:1-17 and Deuteronomy 5:6-21. Once again, traditional Jewish and Christian interpreters have shown how these and other differences can be reconciled. But critical interpreters have seen them as reflecting a long, complex history of oral traditions and written sources that were woven together into the Pentateuch as we have it today.

> When you read the Bible and the Pentateuch in particular, you’re confronted with a lot of different types of literature. And sometimes when you read it, you read things like, for example, when the book of Genesis starts off you have Genesis 1:1–2:3... We have a picture of
God creating over seven days a particular order. God creates with his speech and it’s a powerful statement about God being powerful, God being the Creator, God creating humanity in his image. And then the very next chapter, 2:4-25, we have another story of creation, that are kind of one right after another. When you look at that one, some people would see contradictions because now we see God is called the Lord God. Instead of being this God who just speaks things to existence, we have God actually coming down; he creates people. It says he makes a human out of mud, the first man. And then he takes the first woman right out of the man. So, you see God, instead of being this sort of invisible creator God, God's down almost, in human
terms, kind of making stuff happen with his hands... But by having that other story, which is ultimately complementary, not contradictory... And again, we always have to remember if there’s really contradictions, do we really think ancient people didn’t see these things? I mean, that’s a key piece. They aren’t stupid people. It’s a different time, a different culture, but they still have brains, and in their wisdom they keep these things together. And so like the second story gives us a God who is more hands-on. We call that in theology a God who is immanent, the God that comes into creation... And I think the faithful way of reading Scripture is not to read it suspiciously but ultimately read it with a sense to understand it. You know, I may have questions, but it’s a faith-seeking understanding, and at the end of the day, I believe that what’s in the Bible is what God wants to be in the Bible, and my job as a reader is to listen to it attentively, especially in places that may bother me, to try to see, what’s God really saying by putting these two different things sometimes in juxtaposition. But we should be grateful for that because at different times in different places those two different kinds of images may speak more meaningfully at one time than at another time.
— Dr. Brian D. Russell
 
Now that we’ve looked at modern critical approaches in terms of their presuppositions and views of authorship, we can consider some of the main interpretive strategies that critical scholars have followed as they’ve handled the Pentateuch.
 
### INTERPRETIVE STRATEGIES
There are many ways to summarize these matters, but we’ll touch on five major interpretive strategies of modern critical scholars. We’ll consider these strategies in the order they developed starting with source criticism.

#### Source Criticism
Source criticism, or as it was first called, “literary criticism,” originated in the work of K. H. Graf entitled The Historical Books of the Old Testament, published in 1866. It was refined by the better-known interpreter, Julius Wellhausen in his Prolegomena to the History of Israel, published in 1883.
Source critics believed that the Pentateuch had grown out of oral traditions, just like all other ancient religious writings. But they concentrated their attention on identifying and interpreting parts of the Pentateuch that they believed came from independent written sources that emerged during Israel’s monarchical period.
Following Wellhausen’s terminology, the earliest documentary source of the Pentateuch, written in the early monarchy, has normally been deemed “J” for the Yahwist. It bears this name because the prominent name for God in passages identified with this written source is “Yahweh” — spelled with a “J” in German, much like we spell the name “Jehovah” in English. “J” passages appear scattered in the books of Genesis and Exodus. Source critics have argued that portions of the Pentateuch were originally written in Judah during the days of Solomon around 950 B.C. In this outlook, “J” passages represent a document that told of ancient times and supported the centralization
and the regulation of Israelite religion and society by David’s dynasty in Jerusalem.
A second written source of the Pentateuch has been deemed “E,” for the Elohist,
because God normally is called Elohim in these passages. “E” materials also appear in Genesis and Exodus. According to this theory, “E” sources were written around 850 B.C. in the North, after the division of Israel into two kingdoms. “E” texts promoted northern, prophetic views that were critical of David’s dynasty.
A third literary source has been called “D,” or the Deuteronomist. It’s given this name because “D” materials appear primarily in the book of Deuteronomy and only occasionally in other parts of the Pentateuch. This material is usually dated sometime between Josiah’s reforms in approximately 622 B.C. and the fall of Jerusalem to the Babylonians in 586 B.C. In one common theory, “D” represented the work of Levites who defected from northern Israel to Judah. These Levites were loyal to David’s house, but also critical of it.
Finally, a fourth major literary source in the Pentateuch’s development has normally been called “P,” standing for the Priestly writer or writers. In one common reconstruction, “P” was a group of priests who composed Leviticus and compiled and edited other portions of the Pentateuch between 500 and 400 B.C. According to this reconstruction, "P" designed the Pentateuch to direct social order and worship after a remnant of Israel had returned from exile.
Now, during the twentieth century, competent scholars left hardly any aspect of source criticism unchallenged. Yet, vestiges of these outlooks still appear in nearly every critical commentary on the Pentateuch.'

#### Form Criticism
A second major strategy of critical approaches toward the Pentateuch has been deemed “form criticism.”
Form criticism began as a specialized field of Old Testament studies with the work of Hermann Gunkel in The Legends of Genesis, written in 1901. Gunkel and those that followed him accepted the major tenets of source criticism, but they focused on an earlier aspect of the Pentateuch’s development. Rather than focusing on the Pentateuch’s written sources, form critics concentrated on what they believed to be the oral traditions that predated the time of Israel’s monarchs.
During the time when form criticism was popular, scholars noted the ways oral traditions functioned in illiterate tribal cultures. Form critics applied these studies as they searched for the pure, dynamic, pre-literary traditions that led to the documentary sources of the Pentateuch. Form criticism’s method was basically twofold: On the one side, form critics analyzed passages to discover ancient oral forms, or genres, like myths, folk-tales, sagas, romances, legends, and parables. On the other side, they associated these genres with cultural contexts known as the “Sitze im Leben,” or the “life settings” of these oral traditions. These contexts included worship, tribal campsites, familial instruction, local courts, and the like. For example, a number of form critics have treated the account of Jacob wrestling at Peniel, in Genesis 32:22-32, as a story that was originally told around the campfires of an ancient tribe. They’ve argued that it initially grew out of tales of supernatural, magical events at the ford of the Jabbok River. In this reconstruction, it was only much later that the story was associated with a tribal figure known as Jacob. To be sure, form criticism rightly stressed the importance of the structures and formal features of biblical texts. But, like source criticism, form criticism has also been challenged in a variety of ways. Challenges to form criticism focus especially on its speculative reconstructions of the oral forms and settings behind biblical texts. Even so, we still find form criticism turning many critical scholars toward questionable reconstructions even today, rather than toward the Pentateuch as it exists in the canon of Scripture.

#### Tradition Criticism
A third major way that critical scholars have interpreted the Pentateuch is often called tradition criticism or traditio-historical criticism. Building on the conclusions of source and form criticism, tradition critics focused on how primitive oral traditions and written texts developed into complex theological and political perspectives. Leading scholars like Martin Noth in A History of Pentateuchal Traditions, published in 1948, and Gerhard von Rad in his Theology of the Old Testament, published in 1957, asked how the Pentateuch reflected the influence of various traditions. Among other things, tradition critics identified what they believed to be sets of competing theological beliefs found in the Pentateuch. They noted how the Pentateuch reflected consolidations of diverse traditions on subjects like creation, the patriarchs, the exodus from Egypt, and the conquest of the Promised Land. They also explored views concerning the tribes of Israel, David’s throne, and Jerusalem’s temple, to mention just a few. And they believed these complex streams of theology deeply influenced many of the major themes that appear in the Pentateuch. Once again, most of the specific conclusions of tradition criticism have been questioned through the years. Yet, we can see the vestiges of this approach when Old  Testament interpreters speak of passages reflecting various streams of tradition in Israel that contradicted or even competed with each other.

#### Redaction Criticism
A fourth major way that critical interpreters have approached the Pentateuch’s development has been called redaction criticism. As the word “redaction” indicates, this strategy focused on how hypothetical documents were edited together into the Pentateuch as we know it today.
Redaction criticism began in the twentieth century in New Testament studies as a way of explaining the differences between the Gospels of the New Testament. Redaction critics believed these differences resulted from editing and reshaping previously written records. Similar techniques were applied to the Pentateuch. Attempts were made to explain how different editors took earlier written sources like “J”, “E”, and “D” and wove them together until the Pentateuch reached its final shape. This approach especially focused on the late editorial work of “P.” Redaction criticism had the advantage of drawing attention to the books of Genesis through Deuteronomy as they appear in the Bible today. But redaction criticism never broke significantly with the conclusions of source, form and tradition criticism.

#### Contemporary Criticism
At this point, we should mention some of the tendencies that characterize contemporary criticism, or the more current influential critical approaches to the Pentateuch. In recent decades, many leading critical interpreters have sought to go beyond older critical historical reconstructions. Instead, they’ve concentrated on the remarkable theological unity and depth of the Pentateuch’s traditional Hebrew text. These approaches have taken different forms — rhetorical criticism, canonical criticism, new literary criticism — to name just a few. But they all share a focus on interpreting the Pentateuch as it’s been handed to us through the synagogue and the church. Treatments of the Pentateuch in its final form are more promising than older critical approaches. But only time will tell what fruit these more contemporary approaches will yield. So far in our “Introduction to the Pentateuch”, we’ve focused on modern critical approaches to this part of the Bible. Now we should turn to our second main topic in this lesson: modern evangelical outlooks on the Pentateuch. How do evangelicals today approach the first five books of the Bible?

## MODERN EVANGELICAL APPROACHES
 
You’ll recall that for our purposes here we’ve defined evangelicals as those who hold to the full authority of Scripture. Needless to say, evangelicals haven’t always applied this conviction in precisely the same ways. But as we’ll see, this commitment to Scripture’s authority still leads evangelicals to handle the Pentateuch very differently than modern critical scholars. We’ll summarize modern evangelical outlooks on the Pentateuch along the lines of our earlier discussion. First, we’ll look at some important presuppositions that should guide us. Second, we’ll consider evangelical outlooks on the authorship of the Pentateuch. And third, we’ll survey several major evangelical interpretive strategies. Let’s look first at some important evangelical presuppositions.

### PRESUPPOSITIONS
We’ll limit ourselves to two presuppositions that contrast critical and evangelical outlooks. First, we’ll examine our belief in supernaturalism. And second, we’ll look at our presuppositions about the historical development of Israel’s faith. Let’s look first at our belief in supernaturalism.

#### Supernaturalism
> “Supernatural” is kind of our modern language as distinguished from “natural” because, of course, if we believe in God, we believe God works through all things. But since the Scottish skeptic philosopher David Hume made that kind of distinction and said, “Well, we don’t have reason to believe in supernatural activity,” it’s been an issue. And that’s been one of the main reasons that many people have argued against the reliability of the Bible, because they say, well, the Bible is full of miracles and we know that miracles don’t happen. Well, why do we know miracles don’t happen? Well, because David Hume “proved” that. And you go back and you look at his argument, and his argument isn’t very good at all. In fact, one of the key points of his argument is that we don’t have eyewitnesses, who — credible eyewitnesses — who claim the existence of miracles, certainly not today when we can test it. And yet, even in Hume’s day, there were credible eyewitnesses that God was still doing miraculous things, and today we have an incredible number of those... And if they take place today, how much more can we expect that they took place at significant junctures in salvation history as God was working.
— Dr. Craig S. Keener

The Scriptures teach that God ordinarily directs history in ways that follow discernable patterns. Reason and science are gifts from God that help us discern these patterns. And for this reason, evangelicals rightly value rational and scientific research into the Pentateuch. But at the same time, followers of Jesus also know that God has involved, and continues to involve himself supernaturally in the world. God acts in ways that are without, beyond, and even against ordinary processes and natural causes. This belief affects our study of the Pentateuch in many ways. But in particular, it assures us that God inspired and superintended the writing of these Scriptures. So, they are his fully authoritative and reliable Word. Of course, we always have to be careful not to confuse our interpretations with what the Pentateuch actually says. Our interpretations are always subject to improvement. But from an evangelical point of view, whatever the Pentateuch actually claims to be true is true because it is inspired by God. 
Our presuppositions about supernaturalism lead directly to presuppositions about the historical development of Israel’s faith.

#### Historical Development
As we’ve seen, modern critical scholars have argued that Israel’s faith developed by natural means along the same lines as all other religions in the ancient Near East. But evangelicals hold that Israel’s faith developed through special divine revelations. God actually revealed himself directly to men and women, beginning with Adam, and then Noah. And he also spoke to Israel’s patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. He addressed Moses in the burning bush. He disclosed his Law to Israel at Mount Sinai. These kinds of revelations caused Israel’s faith to develop differently than other religions in the ancient Near East. To be sure, God’s common grace and the influence of Satan led to similarities between Israelite faith and the religions of other nations. But Israel’s faith did not simply evolve naturally. Instead, God supernaturally led the development of Israel’s early faith just as the Pentateuch teaches.
We’ve considered modern evangelical outlooks and the presuppositions that contrast with critical approaches to the Pentateuch. These outlooks have led to contrasting beliefs about the Pentateuch’s authorship. Critical scholars reject the idea that the Pentateuch could have come from the days of Moses. But evangelicals continue to affirm the longstanding Jewish and Christian belief that the Pentateuch came from Moses.
