### AUTHORSHIP

To investigate evangelical outlooks on the Pentateuch’s authorship, we’ll look in two directions. First, we’ll note some biblical evidence for this point of view. And second, we’ll explain how modern evangelicals believe in what’s been called “essential Mosaic authorship.” Let’s start with some biblical evidence for Moses’ authorship.

### Biblical Evidence
Scripture contains more than enough biblical evidence for the traditional view that Moses was the author of the Pentateuch. But for the sake of time, we’ll consider just a few passages from three distinct parts of the Bible, starting with evidence from the New Testament. Listen to Luke 24:44 where Jesus said:

> Everything must be fulfilled that is written about me in the Law of Moses, the Prophets and the Psalms (Luke 24:44).

Here, Jesus referred to the entire Old Testament in three divisions, much like other Jews in his day: Moses, the Prophets and the Psalms. Through these designations,
Luke plainly indicated that Jesus associated the Pentateuch, or Torah, with Moses.
Jesus also referred to Moses as the author of the Pentateuch in John 5:46 where he
said:

> If you believed Moses, you would believe me, for he wrote about me (John 5:46).

In addition to Jesus’ own testimony, other New Testament passages refer to specific portions of the Pentateuch as coming from Moses. We see this in places like Mark 7:10, John 7:19, Romans 10:5, and 1 Corinthians 9:9.
In reality, the New Testament support for Mosaic authorship was based on the testimony of the Old Testament. And on many occasions, Old Testament books associate the Pentateuch with Moses. For example, listen to 2 Chronicles 25:4:

> [Amaziah] acted in accordance with what is written in the Law, in the Book of Moses (2 Chronicles 25:4).

Similar Old Testament passages also associate Moses with the Pentateuch, including verses like 2 Chronicles 35:12; Ezra 3:2 and 6:18; and Nehemiah 8:1 and 13:1. We should also note that the testimony of the New Testament and Old Testament
in general is based on what the Pentateuch itself says about its author. Strictly speaking, most of the Pentateuch is anonymous. Except for the first verse of Deuteronomy, Moses isn’t named at the beginning or the end of any of these books in a way that would indicate his authorship. But this was not uncommon in the ancient Near East. Nor was it unusual in the Scriptures. In fact, the Pentateuch itself makes explicit statements verifying that
Moses received revelations from God and was responsible for the Pentateuch’s composition. For instance, Exodus 24:4 tells us that Moses wrote the Book of the Covenant found in Exodus 20:18–23:33. In Leviticus 1:1-2 we learn that the regulations in Leviticus were given to Israel through Moses. In Deuteronomy 31:1 and 32:44, we’re told that Moses gave the speeches contained in the book of Deuteronomy. In sum, the Pentateuch clearly and explicitly claims that Moses was actively involved in receiving and transmitting the contents of major portions of the Pentateuch.

These and many other biblical evidences explain why evangelicals have stood strong against critical speculations about the Pentateuch’s authorship. Clearly, Scripture doesn’t support critical reconstructions that assume the Pentateuch was written much later than the life of Moses. If we follow the testimony of the Old and New Testaments, we can rest assured that we should associate the Pentateuch with Moses.

> The Pentateuch itself presents itself as being essentially Mosaic. Moses is one of the major characters, of course, from Exodus through Deuteronomy. And the text presents itself as being largely from the time of Moses. We’re told in Exodus, for example ... that Yahweh told Moses to write the Book of the Covenant, which is Exodus 21 to 23. We’re told in the book of Leviticus that we’ve got a series of speeches and laws presented from Moses. Moses is the main character in the book of Numbers, of course. In the book of Deuteronomy we’ve got a series of speeches that Moses delivered, and we’re told several times within the book of Deuteronomy that Moses wrote this section and handed it to the priests. Now, that doesn’t necessarily mean that Moses wrote the book of Deuteronomy as a whole per se, but the book of Deuteronomy itself tells us that significant portions of the book, the bulk of the book, Moses wrote and then handed to the priests. So, for example, in Deuteronomy, whether or not he was the final author or the final narrator, we may have at least 90% of the book that Moses himself wrote.
— Dr. Gordon H. Johnston

Having seen that the basic concept of Mosaic authorship is supported by biblical evidence, we should turn to a second consideration. What do modern evangelicals mean by essential Mosaic authorship?

### Essential Mosaic Authorship
As evangelicals responded to critical views on the Pentateuch, they refined their responses in a variety of ways. But by the middle of the twentieth century, it became common to speak of “essential Mosaic authorship” of the Pentateuch.
Listen to the way Edward J. Young summarized this outlook in his Introduction to
the Old Testament, published in 1949:

> When we affirm that Moses wrote ... the Pentateuch, we do not mean that he himself necessarily wrote every word... [He may] have employed parts of previously existing written documents. Also, under divine inspiration, there may have been later minor additions and even revisions. Substantially and essentially, however, it is the product of Moses. 

Now, evangelicals have understood the details of this outlook on Moses’ authorship in a variety of ways. But to one degree or another, we speak of “essential Mosaic authorship” to remind ourselves of three factors that we must always keep in mind: the sources Moses used, the process by which the Pentateuch was written, and the updating of the Pentateuch that took place after the days of Moses. Let’s consider first the sources Moses used.

Sources. The Scriptures tell us that God revealed himself to Moses in different ways. For instance, God wrote the original Ten Commandments with his own finger. And the Book of the Covenant contains the laws that God gave Moses on Mount Sinai. But, as with many other parts of Scripture, there are indications that Moses also used additional
sources as he wrote the Pentateuch.
On the one hand, he probably drew from a variety of oral traditions. For instance,
in all likelihood Moses learned some things from his birth mother and extended family during his early childhood. Moreover, we see in Exodus 18:17-24 that Moses was quite receptive to instruction from his father-in-law, Jethro the Midianite.

> Any time we talk about oral traditions behind any part of the Pentateuch, including the primeval history or some other part, it’s a bit nebulous because there is obviously no concrete evidence for it. That’s what it means when you say it’s "oral", it means nothing was written down. But when you think about it for just a minute, we know a couple of things that help us realize that Moses probably did not just simply one day think up these stories, nor did God probably just tell him these stories one day without any kind of oral background. One evidence of that is just the fact that primitive cultures even today depend a lot on storytelling, a lot on repetition from generation to generation of ancient stories of their peoples, and this is often paralleled back to biblical times when people would do similar sorts of things. And the most concrete evidence we have of that in the Pentateuch, as a whole, is the way that the stories that are found in Exodus and Numbers are repeated often in the book of Deuteronomy. And in the book of Deuteronomy, we’re given the context where Moses is giving speeches or giving sermons that include elements that we find also in the book of Exodus and Numbers. But the interesting thing about them is while they’re similar they’re not exactly the same.
And so, there was a culture in the days of Moses, there was a culture in Israel in those days, of taking stories from the past or taking tales from the past, things that had happened and how they’d been passed down from generation to generation and then using them in specific ways in the context where you lived. And of course, you know Moses grew up in his mother’s home in the early years of his life, and this of course would have given him stories to know about his ancestors, know about his identity as a Hebrew, know his identity as one who descended from Abraham. And, of course, as Moses would interact with the elders of Israel, even upon his return from his time with Jethro, he would have been learning even more stories that were distinctive to his ancestry. And so, there’s good reason to think that Moses did, in fact, depend on oral traditions, or stories that were told from generation to generation, as he wrote different parts of the Pentateuch.
— Dr. Richard L. Pratt, Jr

The influence of oral traditions explains a remarkable feature of Moses’ call at the burning bush. Listen to what took place in Exodus 3:13, 16:

> Moses said to God, “Suppose I go to the Israelites and say to them, 'The God of your fathers has sent me to you,' and they ask me, 'What is his name?' Then what shall I tell them?" ... “[S]ay to them, 'The Lord, the God of your fathers — the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob — appeared to me’” (Exodus 3:13, 16).

Notice that God simply told Moses to refer to him as “the Lord” — or Yahweh — “the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.” Someone must have taught Moses about the divine name Yahweh and the traditions of the patriarchs. Otherwise, God’s statement would have raised countless questions in Moses’ mind. But, as we see here, Moses was so well prepared to receive God’s directive that he never raised any questions about it.
We can be even more confident that Moses’ sources also included independent documents when he composed the Pentateuch. We see this in places like Exodus 24:7. This verse indicates that Moses wrote “the Book of the Covenant” as an independent document that he later included in the book of Exodus. And in Numbers 21:14-15, Moses quoted geographical references from an existing book known as “the Book of the Wars of the Lord.”
In addition to this, in Genesis 5:1, we read what is likely an explicit reference to an external literary source called “the book of the generations of Adam.” As this literal translation indicates, Moses probably referred to information that he acquired from an actual “book” or “scroll” — פ ֶרֵ֔ס (sēpher) in Hebrew — about Adam’s descendants.
Moreover, Exodus 17:14 refers to a record of battle. In this verse, God commanded Moses:

> Write this on a scroll as something to be remembered and make sure that Joshua hears it (Exodus 17:14).

God’s command to Moses indicates that Moses independently recorded at least some events before he wrote the Pentateuch as a whole.

> When you take a look at the Pentateuch it appears that, especially in the case of the book of Genesis, Moses was actually incorporating very ancient documents. We know Moses would have known, actually, four languages. Moses knew Egyptian. He also knew Hebrew because he was raised in a Hebrew family; his mother was his own wet nurse. We also know that he would have known the common language of that day, the international trade and diplomatic language called Akkadian. And he also would have known Aramaic, because Aramaic is a language that the Israelites spoke in their early days — Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and so on. So, Moses was a very, very well-trained, well- educated person, and it appears from the way that he structured the book of Genesis that he’s telling us he was using certain documents, because ten times he says to us, “These are the generations of...” or “These are the accounts of...” so-and-so. And it appears that those are accounts that he had access to, that he had preserved, that he had translated, perhaps, from some original language, partly Aramaic, perhaps, or earlier Canaanite, into the Hebrew that he wrote in for the people that he was writing Genesis for. Not necessarily was this the case after Genesis. Once you get to Leviticus and Numbers and so on, and certainly Exodus and Deuteronomy, once you get the final four books of the Pentateuch, Moses is composing those on site, on the scene. He’s right there; he’s making it happen. And more importantly, God’s making it happen, because the bulk of those books is God's words through his prophet.
— Dr. Douglas Stuart

In addition to acknowledging oral and literary sources for the Pentateuch, when evangelicals speak of essential Mosaic authorship they also acknowledge that the Pentateuch was actually written down through a complex process.
Process. To begin with, Moses delivered much of the Pentateuch through oral recitation before it was actually written down. His speeches in Exodus and Deuteronomy provide us with explicit examples of this. And it’s likely that other portions of the Pentateuch were also delivered to Israel orally at first and then written down later.
It’s also very likely that Moses employed amanuenses — secretaries or scribes — to compose the Pentateuch. We know that Moses was educated in the courts of Egypt. So, he would have been familiar with the well-established practice of using scribes and secretaries for writing official documents. As Israel’s leader, Moses probably commissioned amanuenses to write much, if not all of the Pentateuch under his supervision.
Scripture is clear that other inspired biblical writers also employed secretaries. For instance, in Jeremiah 36:4, the prophet Jeremiah explicitly instructed his disciple Baruch to write down his words.
We can see evidence of this practice primarily in the Pentateuch’s uneven literary styles. For instance, the narrative styles that appear in various portions of Genesis are quite different from each other. And we see remarkable differences between the formulaic and repetitious Hebrew of Deuteronomy and all the other books of the Pentateuch. In all probability, variations like these reflect the work of different scribes.
Essential Mosaic authorship concerns not only the sources and the process Moses used, but also the updating of the Pentateuch after the time of Moses.
Updating. As we’ve seen, critical interpreters treat the entire Pentateuch as reaching its final form after Israel’s return from exile. But evangelicals have held that the Pentateuch originated in the days of Moses. Still, there are some portions of the Pentateuch that represent slight editorial updating after the days of Moses.
Now, we have to be very careful as we date particular elements of the Pentateuch. For instance, some interpreters have suggested that every passage that mentions “Philistines” must have been written after the days of Moses. But this point of view is less than convincing for at least three reasons. First, the archeological data for the presence of Philistines in the region is disputed. Second, Moses may have used the term
“Philistine” (which means “traveler”) as a sociological designation. And third, even if the term “Philistine” was not known in Moses’ day, it’s always possible that the use of “Philistine” simply represents a slight updating to aid audiences after the days of Moses.
In a similar way, interpreters have argued that the list of Edomite rulers in Genesis 36:31-43 goes far beyond Moses’ lifetime. But the identifications of Edom’s rulers listed in Genesis are not certain. And it’s also possible that these passages merely contain slight extensions of lists added after Moses’ time.
One clear example of minor updating in the Pentateuch appears in Genesis 14:14. There we read:
 When Abram heard that his relative had been taken captive, he called out the 318 trained men born in his household and went in pursuit as far as Dan (Genesis 14:14).
This passage says that Abraham pursued his enemies “as far as Dan.” But we learn in Joshua 19:47 that this northern region wasn’t named Dan until the days of Joshua. So, the Scriptures themselves indicate that Genesis 14:14 reflects an updated place name. This type of modernization would have helped later readers associate the story of Abraham with geography they knew. And it’s likely that a number of other passages in the Pentateuch were updated in this same way as well.
Perhaps the best known and most significant updating found in the Pentateuch is the record of Moses’ death in Deuteronomy 34. But even here, we have little more than an appendix explaining what happened to Israel’s lawgiver.
In addition to minor updates like these, the Pentateuch’s language was also updated as the Hebrew language developed. Recent research strongly suggests that Moses
wrote in a language that scholars have called “proto-Hebrew.” Evidence from international documents found in Egypt, known as the “Amarna letters” indicates that this form of Hebrew was closely related to Canaanite dialects used in Moses’ day. But this language was much earlier than what we find in the traditional Hebrew text of the Pentateuch.

>  The question of the language of the Old Testament is a fascinating one. When did this language... Where did it come from? Where did it emerge? It is one that has puzzled people for a long time, because the evidence on the ground from archeology, is there even Hebrew writing, ancient Hebrew? And we do have quite a bit of texts that have been excavated in the recent past, in the twentieth century. And, but they all come late. They come later than the Mosaic time... And so, what do you do with that? Well, we have evidence during the thirteen hundreds, fourteenth century B.C. that there was a whole diplomatic correspondence, an archive that was excavated, not in Canaan, the land of Israel — that will become the land of Israel — but in Egypt... And they write in Akkadian, which is a language that really originates from Mesopotamia, but it’s the lingua franca, it’s the international language of diplomacy of the time. But they’re Canaanites, they’re local guys writing to their rulers in Egypt, and
they have little margin notes that they have there, and this is written in Canaanite. And then that’s our connection. The Canaanite language is then what connects us to the Hebrew of the Mosaic time. Now, of course, we don’t have any record, we don’t have anything left of the Hebrew of the Mosaic era, but that’s our connection, that’s our bridge. So, it goes from the Canaanite margin notes that we have to the Hebrew of Moses’ time to the Hebrew that we know as standard biblical Hebrew in which most of the pre-exilic Hebrew and the text of preceding the exiles come from. So, that’s our connection. It’s an indirect one, but it’s a real one, and it’s a substantial one.
— Dr. Tom Petter

During the time of Israel’s monarchs, between 1000 B.C. and 600 B.C., the language had developed into what is now called “old” or “Paleo-Hebrew.” Many scholars would agree that portions of the Pentateuch resemble this stage of Hebrew, such as parts of Exodus 15 and Deuteronomy 32.
But the vast majority of the Pentateuch very closely resembles the vocabulary, spelling, and grammar of what we now call “Classical Hebrew,” a stage in the development of Hebrew that was in use sometime between the mid-eighth and the early sixth centuries B.C.
From this evidence, it would appear that the Proto-Hebrew that Moses himself used was updated to Paleo-Hebrew. Then it was later modernized into Classical Hebrew as we have it now in the Hebrew Bible.
It’s always important to remember that in the days of Jesus and his apostles and
prophets, the Hebrew of the Pentateuch had already gone through these kinds of changes. But this fact didn’t dissuade Jesus or his followers from treating the Pentateuch of their day as faithfully representing what Moses himself wrote. So, as followers of Christ today, we can rest assured that the Pentateuch, as we have it now, faithfully represents Moses’ original writings.
So far, we’ve looked at modern evangelical outlooks and touched on some important presuppositions that evangelicals bring to the Pentateuch. And we’ve considered how evangelicals view the authorship of this part of the Bible. Now, let’s note  some of the ways these outlooks have affected the interpretive strategies that evangelicals follow.

### INTERPRETATIVE STRATEGIES
There are many ways to describe these interpretive strategies, but we’ll speak of three main directions that evangelicals have pursued. First we’ll consider what we may call thematic interpretation. Then we’ll explore historical interpretation. And finally, we’ll investigate literary interpretation. These three strategies are highly interdependent and never operate apart from each other. But they represent different emphases, so it will help to look at them individually, beginning with thematic interpretation.

#### Thematic
In thematic interpretation, we hold up the Pentateuch like a mirror to reflect on issues that are important to us. Evangelicals have legitimately emphasized certain topics or themes in this part of the Bible. But as we’ll see, every book in the Pentateuch has its own sets of priorities. So, Moses himself may or may not have emphasized these themes. This approach has characterized much of Christian interpretation throughout the millennia.
The list of themes that Christians have emphasized is very long. Some have stressed personal questions and current controversies. Others have used the Pentateuch as support for their views in traditional systematic theology. For instance, the Pentateuch reveals many things about God. It also spends a great deal of time on different aspects of humanity. And it gives a lot of attention to the rest of creation in general.
Now, one of the greatest drawbacks to thematic interpretation is that it often minimizes the fact that Moses’ original themes were for the Israelites who followed him toward the Promised Land. And because little attention is given to this original context, thematic interpretations often do little more than draw attention to minor themes.
Still, we should always keep in mind that the New Testament validates this approach to the Pentateuch. Jesus and New Testament authors looked to the books of Moses when they dealt with themes like justification by faith, divorce, faith and works, and a host of other relatively minor themes in this part of the Bible. So, as long as we’re careful not to read themes into these Scriptures, thematic interpretation can be a valuable approach to the Pentateuch.
In addition to the interpretive strategy of thematic interpretation, it’s also been common for evangelicals to explore the Pentateuch with what we may call historical interpretation.

Historical
Evangelicals not only believe that the theological themes of the Pentateuch are true. But, following the examples of Jesus and his apostles and prophets, we also believe that the Pentateuch’s record of history is true. For this reason, evangelicals have often interpreted the Pentateuch as a means of discovering what happened in the past.
We’ve mentioned that thematic interpretive strategies treat the Pentateuch like a mirror that reflects on themes that are of interest to us. But, historical analysis treats the Pentateuch like a window to history. We look through the books of Moses, as it were, to explore the history that lies behind them.
Genesis traces history from creation to the days of Joseph. Exodus’ main storyline extends from the death of Joseph to the time when Israel encamped with Moses at the
foot of Mount Sinai. Leviticus elaborates on some of the laws and rituals that Moses received while at Mount Sinai. Numbers traces the march of the first and second generations of the exodus from Mount Sinai to the Plains of Moab. And Deuteronomy elaborates on Moses’ speeches to Israel on the plains of Moab, as they were about to enter Canaan. In historical interpretation, evangelicals have capitalized on this rather obvious historical orientation.
As valuable as historical interpretation has been, this approach to the Pentateuch has its limitations as well. Much like thematic analysis, historical interpretation gives relatively little attention to Moses and his original audience. Instead, the orientation is toward what God did in different periods of time before the books of the Pentateuch were written. What did God do with Adam and Eve? What was the significance of Noah’s flood? How did Abraham interact with God? What did God accomplish when Israel crossed the sea? These are legitimate pursuits, but they minimize the significance of Moses as the author and Israel as the original audience.
Clearly, evangelicals have benefitted in many ways from thematic interpretation and historical interpretation of the Pentateuch. But in recent decades, a third orientation has moved to the foreground, what we may call literary interpretation.

#### Literary
As we’ve seen, thematic analysis treats the Pentateuch as a mirror that reflects on themes that are important to us. Historical analysis treats the Pentateuch as a window to historical events prior to the writing of the Pentateuch. By contrast, literary analysis treats the Pentateuch as a portrait, a literary work of art designed to impact its original audience
in particular ways. Essentially, literary interpretation asks: How did Moses intend to impact his original Israelite audience as he wrote the Pentateuch?
It’s fair to say that Moses had many purposes. But it helps to describe these purposes in general terms. So, we’ll describe Moses’ goal in this way: As Israel’s God- ordained leader,
Moses wrote the Pentateuch to prepare Israel for faithful service to God in the conquest and settlement of the Promised Land.
Rather than touching on an assortment of themes in the abstract, or dealing with events out of mere historical interests, in one way or another every theme and historical record in the Pentateuch was designed to accomplish this goal.
Literary interpretation acknowledges that Moses stood between two periods of time as he composed the Pentateuch. On the one side, Moses wrote about what we may call “that world,” events that had taken place in the past. Events in the book of Genesis occurred long before Moses’ day. Exodus and Leviticus concentrate on events during the time of the first generation of the exodus from Egypt. Numbers and Deuteronomy include events in the time of the first generation to the days of the second generation. When Moses wrote each book of the Pentateuch he had these various times from the past in mind.
On the other side, however, Moses also wrote for “their world,” for the days of his original audience. Moses drew from the past of “that world” to teach his audience how they should think, act, and feel in service to God in “their world.” To accomplish this goal, Moses wrote about “that world” in ways that would connect it with “their world.”
Moses connected the past to his original audience in three main ways. He gave them accounts of the past that established the background or origins of his audience’s current experiences. He also provided them with models to imitate and reject. And he shaped his accounts as foreshadows or adumbrations of his audience’s world.
At times, Moses made these connections rather explicit. For instance, in Genesis 15:12-16, Moses told his audience about the background of God’s promise to bring them out of Egypt. This promise was being fulfilled in their day. In Genesis 2:24, Moses explained that Adam and Eve’s marriage was a model for marriage among God’s faithful people. And in Genesis 25:23, Moses reported that the wrestling between Jacob and Esau in their mother’s womb was a foreshadow of the struggle between his original Israelite audience and the Edomites in their day.
Explicit connections between “that world” and “their world” appear here and there in the Pentateuch. But for the most part, these connections were implicit. So, one of the chief tasks of literary interpretation is to discern how Moses connected “that world” of the past to “their world” of his original audience.
For millennia, the interpretation of the Pentateuch has stressed thematic and historical strategies far more than literary analysis. So, in our lessons on the books of Moses, we’ll devote most of our time to literary interpretation. We’ll unpack how Moses shaped the content of each of his books to provide backgrounds, models and foreshadows of his audience’s experiences. We’ll explore what Moses emphasized for his original audience, how he connected the content of his books to their lives, and how he led his
original Israelite audience toward faithful service to God in their day.

## CONCLUSION
In this introduction to the Pentateuch we’ve examined some crucial features of modern critical approaches to this part of the Bible. We’ve considered how the presuppositions of critical interpreters have led to certain views of the Pentateuch’s authorship and particular kinds of interpretations. We’ve also looked at modern evangelical outlooks and seen how the presuppositions of modern evangelicals have led to a very different view of authorship and interpretation.
As we continue to explore the Pentateuch, we’ll see these introductory considerations move to the foreground many times. And as they do, we’ll find ourselves better equipped to deal with this foundational part of the Bible. Along the way, we’ll consider questions like: Why did Moses write each book of the Pentateuch? What was the original purpose for these books? What were the implications of the Pentateuch for Moses' original audience? By answering these kinds of questions, we’ll discover crucial orientations toward Moses’ original meaning. And not only will we see how the first five books of the Bible served as the earliest standard of Israel’s faith in the days of Moses, but we’ll also discover how these books should serve as the standard of our faith as we follow Christ today.

Dr. Scott Redd (Host) is President and Associate Professor of Old Testament at Reformed Theological Seminary, Washington D.C. Dr. Redd received his M.Div. from Reformed Theological Seminary and his M.A. and Ph.D. from The Catholic University of America. He has taught at Catholic University of America, the Augustine Theological Institute in Malta, and the International Training Institute in the Mediterranean basin. Dr. Redd has contributed to various publications such as Tabletalk (Ligonier Ministries), The Washington Post and First Things. In addition, he published Constituent Postponement in Biblical Hebrew Verse (Society of Biblical Literature, 2014) and Wholehearted: A Biblical Look at the Greatest Commandment and Personal Wealth (Institute for Faith, Work & Economics, 2016).
Rev. Michael J. Glodo is Associate Professor of Biblical Studies at Reformed Theological Seminary in Orlando, Florida.
Dr. Gordon H. Johnston is Professor of Old Testament Studies at Dallas Theological Seminary.
Dr. Craig S. Keener is the F.M. and Ada Thompson Chair of Biblical Studies at Asbury Theological Seminary.
Dr. John Oswalt is the Visiting Distinguished Professor of Old Testament at Asbury Theological Seminary.
Dr. Tom Petter is Associate Professor of Old Testament at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary.
Dr. Richard L. Pratt, Jr. is President of Third Millennium Ministries and Adjunct Professor of Old Testament at Reformed Theological Seminary, Orlando Campus.
Dr. Brian D. Russell is Professor of Biblical Studies and Dean of the School of Urban Ministry at Asbury Theological Seminary in Orlando, FL.
Dr. Douglas Stuart is Professor of Old Testament at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary.
Dr. David Talley is Professor of Biblical and Theological Studies at Biola University’s Talbot School of Theology and is Chair of the Biblical and Theological Studies Old Testament Department.
