	
# Theological Foundations – Module Seven – What is Theology?
## Discussion Questions 

1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	Briefly state the four definitions of “theology” provided by Aquinas, Hodge, Ames and Frame.


3.	Describe the two tendencies or perspectives most people have when approaching the study of theology.


4.	Describe the three primary goals of theology.


5.	In what ways are the three primary goals of theology interdependent? 


6.	How should a person prioritize the three goals of theology?


7.	What selections are represented in a typical seminary curriculum, and why are these selections valuable?


8.	How would you explain the term “theology” to someone who was unfamiliar with the concept?


9.	Which approach to theology do you tend to think is more valuable? Why?


10.	Explain how you might successfully approach theology with a life orientation.


11.	What does it mean to say that “our beliefs and our actions and our feelings form webs of multiple reciprocities”? Why is this concept important to understand as you begin the study of theology?


12.	How can we avoid the trap of intellectualism as we study theology?

 
REVIEW STATEMENT on GOALS - INTERDEPENDENCE: According to this lesson, orthodoxy, orthopraxis and orthopathos are meant to be interdependent. That is, they are neither independent of each other nor in competition with each other. Rather, they are designed to enhance each other. Knowing the truth helps you obey and bring your feelings into line with biblical feelings. Obedience — that is doing the right things — helps you understand more clearly and bring your feelings into line with biblical feelings. Having right feelings, helps you understand more clearly and obey more fully.

CASE STUDY: Edgar was a pastor who was all about creating a lively atmosphere in church. Using this method — through many live musical instruments, lively singing, animated and emotional preaching and loving people, he was able to grow the church to about 200 people. Gradually, theological error crept into the church. He didn't recognize it immediately, but when he did it was too late. The people of his church — including the leadership — had already been highly influenced by it. 

## Reflection Questions 
1.	Have you had the experience of reading instructions on how to put something together, only to discover after reading it that you still have no idea how to put it together? Discuss how combining reading with attempts at doing it — going back and forth between the two — might be more helpful that just reading and then trying to put it together.
2.	Most people have met someone who knows the Bible very well, but who doesn't seem to have a godly character. How do you account for this? Discuss this in your group.
3.	Examine each of the following statements and indicate on a scale of 1 to 5 how true they are of you. Give examples as evidence in each case.
a.	The more I learn the truth the more I teach others the truth.
b.	The more I learn the truth, the more I love God and others.
c.	The more I love God, the more he opens my mind to understand the truth.
d.	The more I love others, the more God opens my mind to understand the truth.
e.	The more I obey God's Word, the more I love others.
f.	The more I obey God's Word, the more I love God.
g.	The more I obey God's Word, the more eager I am to obey.
h.	The more I love God, the more I obey his Word
i.	The more I love others, the more I obey his Word.
4.	Discuss this in your learning community: 
a.	If you don't see your knowledge helping you grow in love and obedience, you need to ask the Lord to help you grow in this area. 
b.	If you don't see your love increasing your knowledge and your obedience, you need to ask the Lord to help you grow in this area. 
