	
# Theological Foundations – Module Eight – Exploring Christian Theology
## Discussion Questions 

1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	As we survey Christian theology, why is it important to maintain a balanced perspective regarding theological unity and diversity?


3.	Describe the three tendencies that theological traditions tend to follow.


4.	How can self-awareness and awareness of others impact and affect our theological traditions?


5.	What are the theological tendencies of the Reformed tradition?


6.	Summarize each of the four distinctives of the Reformed tradition.


7.	Should you believe all the doctrines in the Apostles’ Creed? Why or why not? 


8.	What implications does the theological unity of all believers have for the way you view and interact with other branches of the church? 


9.	What positive influences has your theological tradition had on your theology? What negative influences has it had? 


10.	What are the emphases of your tradition? What are the strengths and weaknesses of these emphases? How might you change your emphases to counter these weaknesses without losing the strengths?


11.	Reformed theology tends to insist that all life is religious. Do you agree or disagree with this idea? Why or why not?
 
REVIEW STATEMENT on CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY – PROBLEMS WITH DEFINITIONS: Distinguishing Christian theology from non-Christian theologies or elements of theology is easy toward the top of the following list, and becomes increasingly difficult as you move down the list: (1) other religions like Hinduism and Islam, (2) Judaism, (3) Christian cults like Mormonism and Jehovah's Witnesses, (4) modern liberalism that has overtaken many traditional denominations, (5) other branches of the church like the Eastern Orthodox church and the Roman Catholic church, and (6) other forms of Protestant faith: Baptist, Presbyterian, Methodist, Anglican and Lutheran. Although we tend to seek unity with those with whom we have the most in common, our Lord exhorts us all toward unity. For this reason, we must never allow the differences among Christians to distract us from the vast common ground we have in Christ.

CASE STUDY: Joaquin was a Christian who became friends with Sara, who was also a Christian but from a different church. As they got to know each other they were pleased to find that they were both Christians. However, when Joaquin's pastor found out what church she attended, he told Joaquin to break off the relationship. The pastor said, "Only our denomination has true believers."
## Reflection Questions 
1.	Discuss the previous case study in your learning community. 
2.	What has been your experience of interacting with people who affirm the Apostles’ Creed and call themselves believers in Christ, but who are from a different theological tradition? Discuss this in your learning community.
3.	Do you have fellowship with people who affirm the Apostles’ Creed and call themselves believers in Christ from different theological traditions? 
a.	Do you think you should? 
b.	Explain why or why not. 
4.	Have you ever learned anything from interacting with those who affirm the Apostles’ Creed and profess belief in Christ and who are from a different theological tradition? Discuss this in your learning community. 
5.	What are you doing to promote unity among believers of different theological traditions. 
## Action Assignments
•	If you have not done so, get to know a believer from a different theological tradition. 
o	Make it a point to understand his tradition and the biblical basis for it. 
o	Make it a goal to understand it so well that you can state various important beliefs of that tradition to the satisfaction of the person from that tradition. 
o	Make it a point to learn from him. 
o	Make it a point to develop a Christian relationship with that person. 

