#### Adam

In the first place, God showed much benevolence toward the first man and woman, even before they sinned. He prepared the world for humanity, taking it from chaos into order. And he formed a splendid garden and placed Adam and Eve within that garden. And day by day God bestowed all kinds of privileges on the human race that extended even beyond the fall into sin. 

> All biblical covenants display God’s benevolence in several ways. One simple way we can see this is that God, without having any obligation, decides to enter into a relationship with his people… Also, divine benevolence is displayed in how God gives many blessings for his people to enjoy. In the case of Adam and Eve, in the first covenant, divine benevolence was shown in how the Lord put at their disposal all that he had created.
— Dr. David Correa, translation

In the second place, the covenant with Adam also required human loyalty. In addition to requiring Adam and Eve to serve him as his images, God tested their loyalty with the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil. As God commanded in Genesis 2:16-17: 

> You may surely eat of every tree of the garden, but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil you shall not eat (Genesis 2:16-17).

Even after Adam and Eve failed to pass this test, God continued to require human loyalty of them and their immediate descendants. 
And in the third place, there were consequences for Adam and Eve’s obedience and disobedience. God explicitly told Adam and Eve that they would suffer the consequences of his curse if they were disloyal and ate the forbidden fruit. In Genesis 2:17 God told them: 

> In the day that you eat of it you shall surely die (Genesis 2:17). 

And by implication, if Adam and Eve had passed this test by obeying God’s command, they would have been greatly blessed. 
Adam’s life with God involved all of the dynamics of God’s covenant. And, as we know from the book of Genesis, what was true for Adam and Eve was true day by day for the generations who lived under God’s covenant with Adam. At God’s royal discretion, through this period of history, life with God continued to involve divine benevolence, human loyalty, and consequences. 
In addition to the universal covenant with Adam, Noah and others under his covenant also lived before God in terms of the same threefold dynamic. 

#### Noah

First, God’s benevolence prepared the way for Noah’s covenant. When God determined to destroy the human race in his righteous judgment, he also determined to save Noah and his family. As we read in Genesis 6:8: 

> But Noah found favor in the eyes of the Lord (Genesis 6:8). 

God showed much kindness to Noah and his family. And similar kindnesses extended beyond the days of Noah to his descendants.
Second, God required loyalty from Noah. He commanded him to build the ark and to gather animals. Listen to Genesis 6:18-19 where the covenant with Noah is associated closely with Noah’s responsibility. There we read: 

> I will establish my covenant with you, and you shall come into the ark … And of every living thing of all flesh, you shall bring two of every sort into the ark to keep them alive with you (Genesis 6:18-19).

Noah was responsible to show loyalty to his divine King by entering the ark with his family and by bringing animals with him to keep them alive. And even after the flood, in Genesis 9:7, God called Noah and his descendants to fulfill the role of humanity as God’s images. Among other things he said: 

> And you, be fruitful and multiply, increase greatly on the earth and multiply in it (Genesis 9:7). 

God continued to call Noah and later generations to be loyal to him.
Third, there were consequences for human actions of obedience and disobedience during the period of Noah’s covenant. Noah himself was faithful to God. So, God was pleased with his sacrifice after the flood and blessed him with a stable world. As we read in Genesis 8:20-21:

> Noah built an altar to the Lord and took some of every clean animal and some of every clean bird and offered burnt offerings on the altar. And when the Lord smelled the pleasing aroma, the Lord said in his heart, “I will never again curse the ground because of man, [even though] the intention of man’s heart is evil from his youth. Neither will I ever again strike down every living creature as I have done” (Genesis 8:20-21).

But God also made it clear after the flood that rebellion against him would have severe consequences of curses. For instance, in Genesis 9:6 God addressed the curse that would come upon murderers: 

> Whoever sheds the blood of man, by man shall his blood be shed (Genesis 9:6).

As the record of Genesis illustrates in many ways, the full range of covenant dynamics continued to impact the lives of every person during the period of Noah’s covenant. 
Now the dynamics of God’s covenants did not only characterize life during the primeval universal covenants. They also shaped life before God during the national covenants that God made with Israel.
