### NATIONAL COVENANTS

The Abrahamic covenant emphasized Israel’s election and promise, the Mosaic covenant highlighted the giving of the law, and the Davidic covenant accentuated David’s permanent dynasty. But life during the covenant with Abraham entailed more than Israel’s election and promises. The time of Moses’ covenant involved much more than the giving of the law. And during the epoch of David’s covenant, God’s interactions with his people involved more than just David’s dynasty. Just as in the earlier covenants, each national covenant was shaped by divine benevolence, human loyalty and the consequences of blessings and curses. 
Once again, we’ll look at these national covenants in the order in which they appear: first, the covenant with Abraham; second, the covenant with Moses; and third, the covenant with David. Let’s begin with Abraham.

#### Abraham

In the first place, God showed much benevolence to Abraham. For example, God demonstrated great kindness to Abraham when he first called Abraham to migrate to Canaan. Consider Genesis 12:2 where God said: 

> I will make of you a great nation, and I will bless you and make your name great, so that you will be a blessing (Genesis 12:2).

Throughout Abraham’s life, God showed mercy to the Patriarch. He forgave him of sin, counted him as righteous and protected him from troubles. And the same was true for every generation of Abraham’s descendants under God’s covenant with him. 
Second, God also required loyalty from the Patriarch. For instance, even in God’s initial call, Abraham was required to obey. As we read in Genesis 12:1 God commanded him: 

> Go from your country and your kindred and your father's house to the land that I will show you (Genesis 12:1).

God required Abraham to leave his homeland and family and to go to a place that he had never seen. And in Genesis 17:1-2, God reminded Abraham of the requirement of loyalty when he confirmed his covenant in these words: 

> I am God Almighty; walk before me and be blameless. I will confirm my covenant between me and you and will greatly increase your numbers (Genesis 17:1-2, NIV). 

Although many Christians fail to see it, Abraham’s covenant relationship with God entailed the requirement of loyalty. Time and again God required obedience from Abraham and all of his descendants under his covenant.

> If you look at Abraham’s relationship with God, it was one that was sovereignly initiated. It was sealed where God … took the curses of the covenant toward himself in the splitting of the animals in Genesis 15, but none of that removed the conditions upon Abraham. And so, obedience to God’s commands, which we could easily call that “faithfulness” to God’s commands, faithfulness to trust the Lord, is the mechanism by which he administers the blessings of the covenant.
— Rev. Michael J. Glodo 

Third, God also made it clear that there were consequences for Abraham’s obedience and disobedience. Listen once again to Genesis 17:1-2. In verse 1 God told Abraham: 

> I am God Almighty; walk before me and be blameless (Genesis 17:1, NIV). 

And then in verse 2: 

> I will confirm my covenant between me and you and will greatly increase your numbers (Genesis 17:2, NIV).

God explicitly stated that the increase of Abraham’s descendants would be a consequence of blessing for Abraham’s obedience. And correspondingly, God also said that disloyalty would result in severe curses. As just one more example, listen to what he told Abraham in Genesis 17:10-14:

> This is my covenant, which you shall keep, between me and you and your offspring after you: Every male among you shall be circumcised… Any uncircumcised male who is not circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin shall be cut off from his people; he has broken my covenant (Genesis 17:10-14).

God required circumcision as a sign of commitment to covenant loyalty so that if any of his male descendants were not circumcised, they would suffer the curse of being cut off from his people. They would be excluded from the blessings of covenant life. 
All three covenant dynamics shaped Abraham’s personal interactions with God, and they continued to regulate the lives of others after him. 
The second national covenant that God made with Israel was the covenant in Moses at Mount Sinai. As we’ve seen, this covenant stressed God’s law. But it would be a terrible mistake to think that other covenant dynamics were absent from life under Moses’ covenant.
