#### Moses

To see that all covenant dynamics were operative in Moses’ covenant, let’s look briefly at the centerpiece of this covenant, the Ten Commandments. First, divine benevolence is evident in the prologue that precedes God’s laws. You’ll recall that the Ten Commandments begin this way in Exodus 20:2: 

> I am the Lord your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery (Exodus 20:2).

The covenant with Moses was not a covenant of works; it was founded on God’s mercy and grace. And God continued to show kindness like this to the generations of Israel throughout the period of God’s covenant with Moses. Even so, the Ten Commandments also make it very clear that God required loyalty from his people. As the first commandment puts it in Exodus 20:3: 

> You shall have no other gods before me (Exodus 20:3).

Divine grace was not contrary to human loyalty. Rather, it supported and led to the grateful response of loyalty from Israel. 

> Before God gives any laws to his people, God reminds them of his grace — “I am the Lord your God who brought you out of Egypt, out of the house of slavery.” And what that does is sets up the rest of the Ten Commandments, not as laws to become God’s people, but gives God’s people an ethos, or a way of life, that allows them to respond to God’s grace… In the first commands we have, essentially, how do you love God? And you love God by having no other gods before the Lord, by not making graven images or images of God, and by not taking the Lord’s name in vain… Then the second half of the Ten Commandments, starting with “Honor your father and mother,” is we have a series of laws that give us standards for interacting with other people, because with the God of the Scriptures, it’s not just a personal spirituality; there’s a communal piece to this. It’s not enough to simply love God. That’s the critical piece, but then that has to then be expressed in the way that we live and love other people, and that’s the second part of the Ten Commandments.
— Dr. Brian D. Russell 

Beyond this, the Ten Commandments also speak of the consequences of obedience and disobedience. In Exodus 20:4-6 we read:

> You shall not make for yourself a carved image … You shall not bow down to them or serve them, for I the Lord your God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers on the children to the third and fourth generation of those who hate me, but showing steadfast love to thousands of those who love me and keep my commandments (Exodus 20:4-6). 

Now that we’ve seen the dynamics of God’s covenants with Abraham and Moses, let’s look at the last national covenant with Old Testament Israel — the covenant with David. This covenant stressed that God was establishing David’s line as the permanent dynasty to rule over Israel.

#### David

Of course, when we look at the larger record of the lives of David and his descendants, it becomes apparent that life in this covenant involved divine benevolence, human loyalty and consequences for obedience and disobedience. For example, listen to the way Psalm 89:3-4 comments on God’s benevolence toward David: 

> You have said, “I have made a covenant with my chosen one; I have sworn to David my servant: ‘I will establish your offspring forever, and build your throne for all generations’” (Psalm 89:3-4).

These verses reflect on the benevolence God showed to David by choosing and upholding him and his descendants as the rightful kings of Israel. But God also required loyalty, and threatened consequences of curses for disobedience in this covenant. Listen to Psalm 89:30-32: 

> If his children forsake my law and do not walk according to my rules … I will punish their transgression with the rod and their iniquity with stripes (Psalm 89:30-32). 

As we see here, if David’s sons forsook God’s laws, they would be punished severely. But as countless passages tell us, great blessings would come to David and his descendants if they were faithful to God. And of course, blessings and curses on the house of David impacted the lives of all of God’s people from this time forward. 
With the dynamics of life in the universal and national covenants in mind, we’re ready to turn to the new covenant, the covenant of fulfillment.
