### NEW COVENANT

God administered the forward movement of his kingdom by building one covenant on top of another throughout Old Testament history. But as we know, by the time Jesus came to earth, Israel had so flagrantly rebelled against God that he had poured out severe curses on his people. Only a remnant of Israelites remained faithful. But in the new covenant, the kingdom of God reaches its fulfillment. And the kingdom of God spreads to the ends of the earth through the kingship of Christ. In this sense, the new covenant doesn’t oppose what God had done in the past. Rather, it fulfills what he had purposed for his kingdom throughout history. So, it shouldn’t surprise us at all to find that the threefold dynamic of life in covenant with God is characteristic of the new covenant as well. 
In the first place, the new covenant involves divine benevolence. God promised to show great kindness to his exiled people as he established the new covenant. As Jeremiah 31:34 reads: 

> For I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more (Jeremiah 31:34). 

In this and many other ways, the new covenant clearly displays God’s tender mercy. 
At the same time, human loyalty is also a factor in the new covenant. God doesn’t promise to do away with his laws, and he doesn’t exempt anyone from obeying them. On the contrary, he enables them to be loyal. In fact, God promised in Jeremiah 31:33: 

> I will put my law within them, and I will write it on their hearts (Jeremiah 31:33).

In the period of the new covenant, God will give his people a love for his law so that they earnestly obey him. 
And finally, the consequences of blessings and curses are also evident in the new covenant. As Jeremiah 31:33 continues: 

> I will be their God, and they shall be my people (Jeremiah 31:33). 

This declaration offers assurance that God will bring great blessings to his people because he will enable them to keep the obligations of his covenant. And by implication, anyone who does not keep these obligations will not receive this blessing.

> What will distinguish the new covenant from the old covenant is the people’s ability to keep it. In Jeremiah 31, God says that he will write the law on their hearts, that he will put his law in their midst, and then he follows this with the covenant formula — “I will be your God and you will be my people.” Well, to understand how it is that God is going to write the law on his people’s hearts, it’s very helpful to go to a very similar passage in Ezekiel. In Ezekiel 36, God says not that he will put his law in their midst, but that he will put his Spirit in their midst. And he doesn’t say that he will write the law on their hearts, but rather he says, “I will cause them to obey my statutes and to follow my rules.” And then, as he does in Jeremiah 31, he follows this again with the covenant formula — “I will be their God and they will be my people.” So, looking at these prophetic texts together, we see that the way that God will write the law on his people’s hearts is by putting his Spirit in their midst. By the indwelling presence of God himself, he will cause his people in the new covenant era to keep his law. And so, in the new covenant, it is secure not because of our faithfulness but because of the instrumentation of God’s Spirit who is living and working in our midst.
— Dr. Matthew Newkirk

Now, we must always remember that the new covenant comes into effect in three stages, following the pattern of the final phase of God’s kingdom in Christ. The new covenant was inaugurated in the first coming of Christ and in the work of his apostles. Throughout church history, the new covenant continues to come to fruition through the power of Christ working in the church. And the new covenant will reach its completion when Christ returns in glory at the consummation of the age.
First, the New Testament emphasizes that the new covenant was inaugurated by divine benevolence when the Father sent his Son to the world. It also stresses that Christ himself was faithful to every requirement of human loyalty, even to the point of death on the cross. And it also emphasizes that Christ received the blessing of resurrection from the dead. And as a result, all who have saving faith in Christ are made acceptable to God. As the writer of Hebrews put it in Hebrews 9:12-15:

> [Christ] entered once for all into the holy places, not by means of the blood of goats and calves but by means of his own blood, thus securing an eternal redemption… Therefore he is the mediator of a new covenant (Hebrews 9:12-15).

God intervened in history to establish the new covenant by sending his Son to keep every detail of God’s law and to offer himself as a perfect and complete sacrifice for sin. And his sacrifice brings eternal forgiveness to all who believe in him. 

> It’s a wonderful Christian doctrine in that, unlike the Old Testament where the mediator, the priest, had to offer the bulls and the goats year in and year out for the forgiveness of sin, Jesus actually entered the most Holy of Holies once and for all, as the Bible tells us. When he died on the cross, when he shed his blood for our sins, it meant that he created an access for us to go to the Lord so that we can actually have someone who can represent us where we can enter the Holy of Holies through his blood.
— Dr. Vuyani Sindo 

Now, despite the importance of Christ’s saving work in his first coming, the great salvation of the new covenant also depends on the continuation of Christ’s work as the mediator of the new covenant. Day by day Christ intercedes on behalf of his people before the throne of his Father in heaven. In Hebrews 7:24-25, the writer of Hebrews pointed to this reality when he wrote these words: 

> [Jesus] holds his priesthood permanently, because he continues forever. Consequently, he is able to save to the uttermost those who draw near to God through him, since he always lives to make intercession for them (Hebrews 7:24-25).

Because of the benevolence of God, Christ reigns and intercedes on our behalf. He deals with our failures and ensures our eternal blessings. 
And finally, because Christ has paid for our sins and continues to intercede on our behalf, we can be confident that the consummation of God’s kingdom in Christ will come one day. When that day comes, we’ll see the benevolence of God as never before. As the writer of Hebrews explained in Hebrews 9:28:

> Christ, having been offered once to bear the sins of many, will appear a second time, not to deal with sin but to save those who are eagerly waiting for him (Hebrews 9:28). 

When that day comes, every person who has trusted Christ will be perfectly loyal to the will of God, and we will receive the blessing of eternal life in the new heavens and new earth.

> When we think of our Lord’s work, we often think of it in terms of first coming and second coming. He, in his first coming — life, death, resurrection — has brought the kingdom to this world. He has brought the new covenant era. He has brought the full forgiveness of sins. He has defeated sin, defeated death, defeated the Evil One… When he comes again, he will then put sin and death and the Devil completely under his feet so that evil will be destroyed, the books will be balanced, final judgment will take place, where in a public way, sin and death is dealt with, those who are not his will be cast in judgment for everlasting. Those who are his will enjoy the fruit and benefit of the new heavens and new earth, and then we will see everything brought to its end.
 — Dr. Stephen J. Wellum

Now that we’ve considered God’s kingdom and his covenants, the history of his covenants and the basic dynamics of God’s covenants, we should turn to our final topic: the people of God’s covenants.
