# The Book of Acts
# Lesson One
# The Background of Acts


## INTRODUCTION

The great German composer Ludwig van Beethoven is still remembered around the world for his beautiful and skillful compositions. But as wonderful as his musical scores are in themselves, his works are even more impressive when we remember that Beethoven suffered progressive hearing loss that began when he was a young man. In fact, it is astounding to realize that Beethoven wrote many of his greatest works when he was entirely deaf. Knowing the background of Beethoven’s life makes his music all the more impressive.
In important ways, appreciating the Scriptures is similar to appreciating Beethoven. It isn’t difficult to see the power and clarity with which the various books of the Bible proclaim God’s revelation. But when we learn about the backgrounds of the writers of the Bible, their world, their lives and their purposes, our understanding and appreciation of the Scriptures become much deeper. 
This is the first lesson in our series The Book of Acts. In this series we will explore the New Testament’s fifth book, often called The Acts of the Apostles or simply Acts. We have entitled this lesson “The Background of Acts,” and we will look at a number of basic issues that will help us understand and appreciate the teachings of this book more deeply and more clearly. 
Our lesson will touch on three crucial aspects of the background of Acts. First, we will examine the authorship of the book. Second, we will look at its historical setting. And third, we will explore its theological background. Let’s begin by looking at the authorship of Acts. 

