### EARLY CHURCH

Now that we have looked at some of the evidence for common authorship in Acts and the Gospel of Luke, we are ready to consider the evidence provided by early church history. From the second to the fourth century A.D., the early church testified that Luke, the traveling companion of Paul, was the author of both Acts and the Gospel of Luke. We will briefly examine this evidence in two ways. First, we will look at early written manuscripts of and about the Bible. And second, we will look at what early church leaders wrote about Luke’s authorship. Let’s begin with the evidence of some ancient manuscripts.


#### Manuscripts

One very old manuscript, referred to as Papyrus75, was discovered in 1952 in Egypt. It was written on papyrus and includes some of our earliest New Testament manuscript evidence. It was probably copied sometime between A.D. 175 and 200, and it includes large portions of the Gospel of Luke and the Gospel of John. Between the texts of the two gospels are written two descriptions of their content. After the conclusion of the Gospel of Luke, the manuscript contains the words “euangelion kata Loukan,” or “the gospel according to Luke.” And immediately following these words is the expression “euangelion kata Ioannan,” or “the gospel according to John.” These notices indicate that the material preceding the words “the gospel according to Luke” was identified as Luke’s gospel. This manuscript evidence indicates that from very early on, it was believed that Luke wrote the third gospel. And by extension, it points to Luke as the author of Acts as well.
Second, the Muratorian Fragment, dated around A.D. 170 to 180, is the earliest known document listing the New Testament books that the early church considered to be canonical. After affirming Luke’s authorship of the Gospel of Luke, it explicitly points to him as the author of Acts as well. In lines 34 through 36 we read these words:

**Moreover, the acts of all the apostles were written in one book… Luke compiled the individual events that took place in his presence.**

This statement indicates that in the second century, it was widely believed that Luke was the author of Acts and had witnessed at least some of the events described within it.
Third, the so-called Anti-Marcionite Prologue, an introduction to the third gospel written around A.D. 160 to 180, describes the authorship of Luke and Acts in this way: 

**Luke, moved by the Holy Spirit, composed the whole of this Gospel… And afterwards the same Luke wrote the Acts of the Apostles.**

Beyond this early manuscript evidence, we also have the testimony of early church leaders indicating that Luke was the author of the third gospel and the book of Acts. 


#### Early Church Leaders

The church father Irenaeus, who lived from around A.D. 130 to 202, believed that Luke was the author of the third gospel. In his work Against Heresies, Book 3, Chapter 1 Section 1, he wrote: 

**Luke also, the companion of Paul, recorded in a book the gospel preached by him.**

Here Irenaeus referred to Acts as the book that recorded the gospel preached by Paul. His words are important because good historical evidence indicates that Irenaeus had access to firsthand knowledge regarding Luke’s authorship of Acts.
Clement of Alexandria, who lived from around A.D. 150 to 215, also referred to Luke as the author of Acts. In book 5, chapter 12 of his Stromata, or miscellaneous matters, he wrote these words:

**Luke in the Acts of the Apostles relates that Paul said, "Men of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious.”** 

And Tertullian, who lived from A.D. 155 to 230, wrote these words in his work Against Marcion, book 4, chapter 2:

**Of the apostles, therefore, John and Matthew first instill faith into us… Luke and Mark renew it afterwards.** 

Here, Tertullian specifically attributed the third Gospel to Luke.
Finally, the great church historian Eusebius, writing around A.D. 323, mentioned Luke as the author of Acts in book 1, chapter 5, section 3 of his Ecclesiastical History. Listen to what he wrote there:

**Luke … has made mention of the census in the Acts.**

In addition to these kinds of affirmative statements, it is striking that there is not one indication in the literature of the early church that anyone other than Luke wrote the third gospel and Acts, even though he was never designated as an apostle. Because of clues like these, we have reason to believe that the early church did not invent the authorship of Luke, but merely passed on what it had received as the truth: that Luke wrote both these books. 

### NEW TESTAMENT

So far we have seen that there is good reason to affirm common authorship for Acts and the third gospel, and that the early church testified that this single author was Luke. Now let’s see what inferences we can draw from other portions of the New Testament about Luke himself. 
We will examine this evidence in two ways. First, we will note some clues we gain from the New Testament about our anonymous author. And second, we will compare these clues with information we have about Luke himself. Let’s look first at clues about our author. 


#### Clues

As we have already said, the author of Acts did not identify himself by name. Apparently, he felt no need to name himself for the sake of his patron Theophilus. In Luke 1:3 he simply said, “it seemed good also to me to write,” and in Acts 1:1 he said, “In my former book … I wrote.” The author assumed that his patron knew who he was. And while this created no problem for Theophilus, it has created many questions for modern readers. 
At the same time, there are a number of things that the New Testament does tell us about our author. First, he was not an apostle. In fact, he probably came to faith after Jesus ascended into heaven. Listen to these details from the Gospel of Luke 1:1-2:

> Many have undertaken to draw up an account of the things that have been fulfilled among us, just as they were handed down to us by those who from the first were eyewitnesses and servants of the word (Luke 1:1-2).

When the author said that the events of Jesus’ life were handed down to us, he indicated that he was not an eyewitness to the life of Jesus.
Second, the style of Greek in Acts and the Gospel of Luke indicates that the author was well educated. Many of the books in the New Testament are written in a fairly common, even unsophisticated style of Greek. But the Gospel of Luke and Acts show more sophistication in their use of the language.
Third, the second half of Acts indicates that the author was one of Paul’s close traveling companions. In the early chapters of Acts, the narratives are consistently in the third person. But beginning in Acts 16, the narrative often takes on a first-person perspective, using words like “we” and “us.” We find this type of language in Acts 16:10-17; 20:5-15; 21:1-18; and 27:1-28:16. These passages indicate that the writer accompanied Paul during Paul’s later missionary journeys and on Paul’s trip from Caesarea to Rome.
Now that we have some clues about our author, we are in a position to see how well these details correspond to what we know about Luke. 


#### Luke

Let’s look once more at the things we know about the author of Luke and Acts: He was not an apostle. He appears to have been well educated. And he was Paul’s traveling companion. How do these details compare to what we know about Luke?
Well, first of all, Luke was not an apostle. The apostles served in a foundational role for the church, exercising unique authority on Christ’s behalf to establish the church and guard it from error and trouble. And according to Acts 1:21-22, apostles had to be trained by Jesus himself. But Luke never met Jesus in person and never claimed the type of authority that belonged to the apostles. Rather, he was simply a faithful supporting member of Paul’s missionary endeavors. He was the servant of an apostle, or as Paul described him in Philemon verse 24, a “fellow laborer” of an apostle.	
Second, it is likely that Luke was well educated. We can infer this from Colossians 4:14, where Paul identified Luke as a physician. While medicine was not as formal a discipline in the days of the New Testament as it is today, it still required a person with skill and aptitude. 
Third, Luke was Paul’s traveling companion. The apostle Paul mentioned that Luke traveled with him in Colossians 4:14; 2 Timothy 4:11; and Philemon verse 24. 
We can sum up the issue of authorship for Acts in this way. There is a great deal of historical evidence that points to Luke’s authorship of Acts. Luke and Acts have a common author. The evidence of the early church consistently attributes authorship to Luke. And the biblical data is consistent with this idea. In light of these evidences, we have good reason to believe that Luke was the author of both the third gospel and Acts. And we should always remember that Luke had excellent access and proximity to the subject matter he described.
