## HISTORICAL SETTING

Now that we have looked at Luke’s authorship, we are ready to turn to the historical setting of Acts. When did Luke write? And for whom did he compose his book? 
As we investigate the historical setting of Acts, we will look at three topics. First, we will consider the date of composition of Acts, pursuing the question of when Luke wrote Acts. Second, we will investigate the original audience of the book. And third, we will explore the audience’s social context. Looking into these matters will help us to clarify further the proximity of Luke to the narrated events. It will also help us to understand in a deeper and fuller way the impact the gospel had in the first century A.D. Let’s begin with the date of the book’s writing.


### DATE

Although there have been many different opinions on when the book of Acts was first written, in general terms, we can divide the opinions of New Testament scholars into two basic orientations. On the one hand, some have argued that Luke wrote after the destruction of the Jerusalem temple in A.D. 70. And on the other hand, others have argued that he wrote before the destruction of the temple in A.D. 70. The tragic events of A.D. 70 were critical to Jewish history, and for this reason it is helpful to think of opinions on these matters in terms of these events. We’ll look at each of these outlooks, beginning with the possibility that Luke wrote after A.D. 70. 


#### After A.D. 70

Scholars who hold that Acts was written after A.D. 70 base their views on a number of considerations. For instance, many have claimed that the optimism of the book of Acts indicates a date of A.D. 80 to 90. In this view, Acts is too positive about the early church to have been written early on. Instead, it is a nostalgic look at the early church requiring many years of separation from the events themselves. But this view overlooks the sober way that Acts deals with all kinds of problems inside and outside the church.
For the most part, those who believe that Acts was written after A.D. 70 do so because they believe that some material in the book of Acts depends on the works of the Jewish historian Josephus. 
Josephus’ relevant writings were composed no earlier than A.D. 79, and would not have been widely available much before A.D. 85. So, those who believe that Acts depended on the works of Josephus conclude that Acts was written no earlier than A.D. 79 and probably sometime after A.D. 85.
While advocates of this position have pointed to many connections between Acts and the works of Josephus, we will touch on just four connections they have mentioned.
First, Acts 5:36 refers to Theudas, a Jewish revolutionary who may also have been mentioned in book 20 section 97 of Josephus’ Antiquities. Second, Acts 5:37 mentions the revolutionary Judas the Galilean, who appears in book 2, sections 117 and 118 of Josephus’ Jewish Wars, and in book 18, sections 1 through 8 of his Antiquities. Third, the revolutionary called The Egyptian in Acts 21:38 may also appear in book 2, sections 261 through 263 of Josephus’ Jewish Wars, and in book 20, section 171 of his Antiquities. And fourth, a number of interpreters have also argued that the description of Herod’s death in Acts 12:19-23 depended on book 19, sections 343 through 352 of Josephus’ Antiquities.
Despite the number of interpreters who follow this line of reasoning, we need to point out that the parallels between Acts and the writings of Josephus do not prove that Acts was dependent on Josephus’ works. In fact, the descriptions of events in Acts differ from Josephus’ descriptions. So, it seems more likely that Acts and Josephus simply recounted well-known historical events separately or depended on common sources. Since the people mentioned were relatively well-known historical figures, it should not be surprising that they are remembered in more than one historical record. And more than this, in the case of Theudas we are dealing with a very common name. It is possible that two separate individuals with the same name are in view.


#### Before A.D. 70

The second major view on the date of Acts has been that it was written before the destruction of the temple in A.D. 70. There are many evidences in favor of this earlier date, but for our purposes we will focus on what we may conclude from the last scene in the book of Acts. 
Listen to the last two verses in Acts 28:30-31. There Luke wrote these words about Paul:

> For two whole years Paul stayed there in his own rented house and welcomed all who came to see him. Boldly and without hindrance he preached the kingdom of God and taught about the Lord Jesus Christ (Acts 28:30-31).

The book of Acts closes with Paul under house arrest in Rome, boldly proclaiming the Christian gospel. This ending offers important evidence for believing that Acts was written before A.D. 70.
First, Luke’s description of Paul’s ministry stops short of a crucial event that took place in A.D. 64. In A.D. 64, Nero blamed Christians for the devastating fire in Rome and began to persecute Christians. It would be strange for Luke not to mention such a major turn of events if it had already occurred by the time he wrote Acts.
Second, Paul is generally thought to have been martyred during Nero’s persecution of the church, probably in A.D. 65 or shortly thereafter. If Acts had been written after this, it would almost certainly have mentioned the martyrdom of Paul, one of the book’s most prominent characters.
Third, when the Jewish temple in Jerusalem was destroyed in A.D. 70 it significantly impacted the relationships between Jews and Gentiles in the church. The book of Acts focuses on these relationships in many places. So, it seems quite unlikely that Acts would have omitted the destruction of the temple had it occurred.
In light of facts like these, it seems best to conclude that Luke completed Acts close to the time of Paul’s imprisonment and ministry in Rome in A.D. 60 through 62, the last historical detail mentioned in the book.
