## THEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

Now that we have examined the authorship and historical setting of Acts, we are ready to explore our third main topic in this lesson, the theological background of the book of Acts. 
As we study the book of Acts, many theological questions come to mind. Where did Luke learn his theological perspectives? How did he decide what to address in his book and what to omit? What overarching principles guided his writing? Well, the answers to these questions can be found in Luke’s theological background.
Our discussion of the theological background of Acts will divide into three parts. First, we will explore the foundations of Luke’s theology in the Old Testament. Second, we will consider how his theology was influenced by his beliefs about the Messianic kingdom of God. And third, we will see how Luke’s gospel, the first volume of Luke’s work, helps us understand the message of Acts. Let’s begin with the Old Testament foundations to the book of Acts.


### OLD TESTAMENT

The Old Testament influenced Luke’s writing in at least two ways. In the first place, Luke was deeply influenced by the Old Testament’s view of history in general. And in the second place, he was deeply impacted by its treatment of the history of Israel in particular. Let’s look first at how the Old Testament’s view of history in general informed Luke’s theology.


#### History

In his great work Pensées, the 17th century Christian philosopher Blaise Pascal spoke of three great truths that human beings have recognized throughout history. First, he refers to the glory and beauty of creation, the wonder that permeates the universe because God made all things good. Second, he spoke of the perplexing conflict between the creation’s original glory and its present misery and corruption. And third, Pascal spoke of redemption, the hope that there will be a solution to this conflict.
Pascal’s reflections parallel the Old Testament’s division of world history into the three main stages of creation, the fall into sin, and redemption. And in Acts, Luke wrote about the early church in ways that reflected this threefold outlook on history. 
Consider the period of creation. In Genesis 1, God prepared the world to be an extension of his heavenly kingdom. He ordered the universe; formed a paradise in Eden; placed humanity, his royal image, within that paradise; and commanded humanity to multiply and to rule over the earth, beginning in Eden and stretching to the ends of the globe. In short, God set the stage for the full development of his kingdom on earth. 
Luke’s awareness of this important Old Testament idea is evident in many places in Acts. For instance, in 4:24-30, Peter and John spoke of creation as evidence of God’s royal lordship over the earth. In 14:15-17, Paul and Barnabas spoke of creation as the basis for God’s rule over the nations. In 7:49, Stephen asserted that God had created the world to be his royal footstool. Listen to Paul’s words in Athens in Acts 17:24-27:

> The God who made the world and everything in it is the Lord of heaven and earth… From one man he made every nation of men, that they should inhabit the whole earth... God did this so that men would seek him and perhaps reach out for him and find him, though he is not far from each one of us (Acts 17:24-27).

According to this passage, the backdrop to Paul’s gospel ministry reached all the way to creation. God is the Lord who made the world and everything in it. He ordered the world so that men would seek him, reach out for him and find him. Paul’s gospel ministry grew out of the purposes God established at creation. By including these details in his book, Luke indicated that the theme of creation was important to his own understanding of the early church.
In much the same way, Luke’s awareness of humanity’s fall into sin also comes to the foreground in the book of Acts. As we know, Genesis 3 teaches that after God created humanity, Adam and Eve rebelled against him. And the impact of this was tremendous. According to the Old Testament, humanity had such a central role in the world that their fall into sin brought the entire human race under the curse of death and corrupted the entire creation.
Luke wrote of the misery of sin in many places throughout Acts. We find references to the fall in Peter’s sermons in 2:38 and 3:19, in the apostles’ defense before the Sanhedrin in 5:29-32, in Paul’s words to the Ephesian elders in 20:18-35, and in Paul’s speech before King Agrippa in Acts 26:20. 
The book of Acts repeatedly illustrates that everything in creation — the physical world, our economic structures, our political systems, and even the church itself — suffers because of humanity’s fall into sin. 
Happily, Luke’s history in Acts also indicates that he not only believed in the Old Testament teaching about creation and the fall, but also embraced what the Old Testament said about the redemption. As horribly as sin had corrupted humanity and creation, Luke knew that God had not left the world without hope.
The Old Testament taught that God had been redeeming, or saving people from the curse of sin, since it first entered the world. But more than this, OT prophets also predicted a day when sin and its curse would be entirely eliminated from the creation. As Luke wrote the book of Acts, he frequently displayed his belief that this redemption was coming to the world through the saving work of Christ. This theme appears throughout Acts.
To name just a few, we find these themes of redemption in: Peter’s sermon in 2:21-40; the apostles’ defense before the Sanhedrin in 5:29-32; the angel’s words to Cornelius in 11:14; Paul’s speech in the synagogue of Pisidian Antioch in 13:23; Peter’s argument in the Jerusalem counsel in 15:7-11; and Paul and Silas’ words to the Philippian jailor in 16:30-31.
As we approach the book of Acts, we must always remember that Luke was deeply influenced by the Old Testament view of world history as he wrote. This is why he so often recorded moments from the first century that reflected the broad scope of world history from creation, to the fall into sin, to redemption in Christ.
Now that we have looked at the Old Testament’s vision of history in general, we are ready to turn to its vision of the history of Israel in particular, and to the way Luke’s record in Acts depended on the history of this special nation. 


#### Israel

There are countless ways that Luke relied on the history of Israel as he was writing Acts. For the sake of illustration, we will limit our discussion to three events from Israel’s history: God’s choice of Abraham, the Exodus under Moses, and the establishment of David’s dynasty. First, consider how God’s choice of Abraham informed Luke’s history. 
Genesis 12:1-3 records God’s choice of Abraham to be the father of a special nation. There we read these words: 

> The Lord had said to Abram, “Leave your country, your people and your father’s household and go to the land I will show you. I will make you into a great nation and I will bless you; I will make your name great, and you will be a blessing. I will bless those who bless you, and whoever curses you I will curse; and all peoples on earth will be blessed through you.” (Genesis 12:1-3).

According to these verses, God called Abraham to go to the Promised Land for two main purposes. 
On the one hand, Abraham would father a great nation, become famous, and receive many spiritual and material blessings. God’s blessings to Abraham and his descendants after him were to be symbolic demonstrations that there is hope in God’s salvation, even in this fallen world. 
But on the other hand, God’s call went far beyond what Abraham and his descendants would receive. Through Abraham, all peoples on earth would be blessed. Abraham and his descendants would become a conduit of divine blessings to all the families of the earth. 
This twofold focus of God’s choice of Abraham underlies much of Luke’s thinking in Acts. On the one hand, Luke frequently reported how the blessing of salvation in Christ came to the Jews, the descendants of Abraham, fulfilling God’s promises to the great patriarch.
But on the other hand, Luke also focused on how Jewish Christians brought the gospel of Christ to the Gentiles. Time and again in Acts, Luke reported that Jews like Phillip, Peter, Paul and Barnabas took the gospel of salvation to the Gentile world. This too fulfilled God’s promises to Abraham. 
In the second place, Luke’s outlook in Acts also showed his understanding of the relationship between Moses and the Christian church. As God’s deliverer, Moses led Israel from slavery in Egypt, presented God’s Law to the nation, and held them accountable to the Law. And in that same Law, Moses prophesied that God would one day send another prophet like himself to redeem his people from their slavery to sin. And as Luke pointed out in Acts, this prophet like Moses turned out to be Jesus. Listen to Stephen’s words that Luke recorded in Acts 7:37-39:

> Moses … told the Israelites, “God will send you a prophet like me from your own people.” He was in the assembly in the desert, with the angel who spoke to him on Mount Sinai, and with our fathers; and he received living words to pass on to us. But our fathers refused to obey him. Instead, they rejected him and in their hearts turned back to Egypt (Acts 7:37-39).

From Stephen’s point of view, Jesus was the prophet Moses had foretold. So, to reject Jesus was also to reject Moses and the Law, just as the ancient Israelites had done. To be truly committed to Moses and the Law, one must embrace Christ. And consider how Luke summarized Paul’s words to the Jewish leaders in Acts 28:23:
> 
> From morning till evening Paul explained and declared to them the kingdom of God and tried to convince them about Jesus from the Law of Moses and from the Prophets (Acts 28:23).

For Paul and the rest of the early church, acceptance of Moses and the Law was foundational to faith in Christ. And this belief influenced what Luke wrote in Acts.
In the third place, Luke was influenced by the Old Testament record of David’s dynasty. It would be difficult to imagine any Old Testament theme that was more important to Luke than the establishment of David’s house as the permanent dynasty to rule over Israel. 
As Israel grew into an empire in the Old Testament, God chose the family of David as the permanent dynasty to lead his people. But the Old Testament also anticipated the day when the house of David would extend the reign of God from Israel to the ends of the earth. 
As we read in Psalm 72:8, 17:

> David’s son will rule from sea to sea and from the River to the ends of the earth... All nations will be blessed through him, and they will call him blessed (Psalm 72:8, 17).

As these verses reveal, it was through his descendant David that Abraham would become a blessing to the world. But David would not accomplish this himself. Rather, one of his descendants would be the king to extend his benevolent, peaceful rule over the entire world.
In the book of Acts, Luke drew deeply from this hope in David’s house. He understood that Jesus was the son of David, the royal ruler of God’s kingdom who was expanding his reign from Jerusalem to the ends of the earth by means of the church. For example, listen to James’ words at the Jerusalem Council, found in Acts 15:14-18:

> God at first showed his concern by taking from the Gentiles a people for himself. The words of the prophets are in agreement with this, as it is written: “After this I will return and rebuild David's fallen tent. Its ruins I will rebuild, and I will restore it, that the remnant of men may seek the Lord, and all the Gentiles who bear my name, says the Lord, who does these things” that have been known for ages (Acts 15:14-18).

Here James referred to Amos 9:11-12, where Amos predicted that God would restore David’s dynasty and extend his reign over the Gentile nations. As he indicated here, James believed the success of the gospel among the Gentiles was the fulfillment of these Old Testament hopes. 
Luke wanted his readers to understand that Jesus was the heir to Abraham’s promises, the prophet like Moses, and the final Davidic king. Jesus had ascended to his throne and was conquering the world through the proclamation of the gospel and the growth of the church, extending his kingdom of salvation from Jerusalem to the ends of the earth, just as the Old Testament had foretold. 
