# GOALS AND OBJECTIVES

### Goals

In this course, we would like to accomplish the following:

1. We hope you will learn the important factors of the history of the Apostles' Creed and that you will learn the meaning of each of the doctrines expressed in the Apostles' Creed.
2. We hope you become convinced of the value of the Apostles' Creed and its significance for the modern church, and that you believe the doctrines expressed in it.
3. We hope that you will apply the teachings of the course to your own heart and life, trusting God as your Father, trusting in Jesus as your Savior, trusting in the Holy Spirit as your Guide, living by grace, and participating in the Church.
4. We hope you will learn the proper nature and purpose of theology.
5. We hope you will develop a new love for theology, and that you will become excited about doing theology that flows from the Scriptures and changes your heart and life.
6. We hope you make changes in your life as a response to the teachings of this course. It should change the way you do theology and analyze theological expressions, taking into account the aspects of orthodoxy, orthopraxis, and orthopathos.

### Objectives

When you have done the following, it will show that the goals are met:

1. Obtain satisfactory grades on the automatically graded elements of the course, demonstrating that you can:
- identify key information about the history of the Apostles' Creed
- identify the meaning of the doctrines expressed in the Apostles' Creed
- identify key reasons to study theology
- distinguish the significance of orthodoxy, orthopraxis, and orthopathos in the task of theology
- identify the key thoughts of important theologians
- distinguish the different kinds of revelation and their importance in doing theology
- distinguish different views of inspiration and of the proper interpretation of Scripture
- identify the key distinctive emphases of reformed theology.
2. Complete the study guides of the course, expressing your attitude regarding the Apostles' Creed and its doctrines, describing your relationship with God the Father, with Jesus, and with the Holy Spirit, showing that you are living by grace and participating in the Church, expressing your attitude regarding theology, showing how you have applied the teachings of the course to your own life, especially that you can do theology and analyze theological expressions, taking into account the aspects of orthodoxy, orthopraxis, and orthopathos. 

## Thematic Outline of the Course

1. The Articles of the Faith
2. God the Father
3. Jesus Christ
4. The Holy Spirit
5. The Church
6. Salvation
7. What is Theology?
8. Exploring Christian Theology
9. Relying on Revelation
10. Authority and Theology
