List of Contributors to this course (institutions listed relative to the time of recording)

Rev. Azar Ajaj is Director of Public Relations and Lecturer at Nazareth Evangelical College in Nazareth, Israel.

Rev. Dr. Humphrey Akogyeram is a professor at Good News Theological Seminary in Accra, Ghana.

Dr. M. B. is professor at Bethlehem College and Seminary.

Dr. David R. Bauer is Dean of the School of Biblical Interpretation and the Ralph Waldo Beeson Professor of Inductive Biblical Studies at Asbury Theological Seminary.

Dr. Steve Blakemore is the Assistant Professor of Philosophy at Wesley Biblical Seminary.

Dr. D.A. Carson is Research Professor of New Testament at Trinity Evangelical Divinity School and Co-founder of The Gospel Coalition.

Dr. Knox Chamblin (1935-2012) served as Professor of New Testament at Reformed Theological Seminary.

Dr. Paul Chang is the Senior Pastor of Monmouth Chinese Christian Church in Middletown, New Jersey.

Dr. Biao Chen is Director of Chinese Projects at Thirdmill.

Dr. Steve Curtis is Director of Timothy Two Project International.

Dr. Andrew Davis is Senior Pastor at First Baptist Church of Durham, NC and is Visiting Professor of Historical Theology at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary.

Dr. James K. Dew, Jr. is Assistant Professor of the History of Ideas and Philosophy at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary.

Dr. Jeff Dryden is Professor of Biblical Studies at Covenant College.

Dr. J. Ligon Duncan III is Chancellor and CEO of Reformed Theological Seminary and the John E. Richards Professor of Systematic and Historical Theology.

Dr. Bruce L. Fields is Chair of the Biblical and Systematic Theology Department and Associate Professor of Biblical and Systematic Theology at Trinity Evangelical Divinity School.

Dr. John Frame is Professor of Systematic Theology and Philosophy at Reformed Theological Seminary in Orlando, Florida.

Dr. Matt Friedeman is Professor of Evangelism and Discipleship at Wesley Biblical Seminary.

Rev. Hutch Garmany is Pastor and Church Planter of Grace Community Trenton in Trenton, Georgia.

Rev. Michael J. Glodo is Associate Professor of Biblical Studies at Reformed Theological Seminary in Orlando, Florida.

Dr. Steve Harper is the founding Vice President of the Florida Dunnam campus of Asbury Theological Seminary in Orlando, FL.

Dr. J. Scott Horrell is Professor of Theological Studies at Dallas Theological Seminary.

Rev. Clete Hux is Director and Counter-Cult Apologist at Apologetics Resource Center in Birmingham, AL.

Dr. Thaddeus J. James, Jr. is Vice President of Academic Affairs at Birmingham Theological Seminary.

Dr. Dennis Johnson is Academic Dean and Professor of Practical Theology at Westminster Seminary California.

Dr. Keith Johnson serves as the Director of Theological Education for the U.S campus ministry of Campus Crusade for Christ and is a guest professor of Systematic Theology for Reformed Theological Seminary.

Dr. Jeffrey Jue is Professor of Church History at Westminster Theological Seminary.

Dr. Kelly M. Kapic is Professor of Theological Studies at Covenant College.

Dr. Riad Kassis is International Director of the International Council for Evangelical Theological Education.

Dr. Craig S. Keener is the F.M. and Ada Thompson Chair of Biblical Studies at Asbury Theological Seminary.

Dr. Michael J. Kruger is President and Professor of New Testament at Reformed Theological Seminary in Charlotte, N.C.

Dr. Dan Lacich is a pastor at Northland, A Church Distributed in Orlando, FL.

Dr. Samuel Ling is Co-founder of China Horizon.

Dr. Robert G. Lister is Associate Professor of Biblical and Theological Studies at the Talbot School of Theology.

Dr. Jeff Lowman is Senior Pastor at Evangel Church PCA in Alabaster, Alabama and Professor of Homiletics and Systematic Theology at Birmingham Theological Seminary.

Dr. Scott Manor is Assistant Professor of Historical Theology, Vice President of Academic Affairs, and Dean of Faculty at Knox Theological Seminary.

Rev. Dr. Emad A. Mikhail is President of Great Commission College in Egypt.

Dr. J. Gary Millar is Principal of Queensland Theological College and Founding Council Member of The Gospel Coalition, Australia.

Dr. R. Albert Mohler, Jr. is President of The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.

Prof. Jorum Mugari is lecturer at Theological College of Zimbabwe and serves with City Presbyterian Church in Bulawayo.

Dr. John Oswalt is the Visiting Distinguished Professor of Old Testament at Asbury Theological Seminary.

Dr. J. I. Packer is Professor of Systematic and Historical Theology at Regent College in Vancouver, British Columbia, and preaches and lectures widely in Great Britain and America.

Dr. Andrew Parlee serves as a missionary with Greater Europe Mission and as a member of the Faculty Board of Approval for Thirdmill.

Dr. Jonathan T. Pennington is Associate Professor of New Testament Interpretation and the Director of Research Doctoral Studies at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.

Nicholas Perrin, Ph.D. is the Franklin S. Dyrness Professor of Biblical Studies at Wheaton College & Graduate School.

Dr. Gregory R. Perry is Vice President for Strategic Projects at Thirdmill and former Associate Professor of New Testament and the Director of City Ministry Initiative at Covenant Theological Seminary.

Dr. Robert L. Plummer is Associate Professor of New Testament Interpretation at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.

Dr. Richard L. Pratt, Jr. is Co-Founder and President of Thirdmill.

Dr. David Samuel is Director of the Association for Theological Education by Extension in Bangalore, India.

Dr. Tim Sansbury is Assistant Professor of Philosophy and Theology and Vice President of Administration at Knox Theological Seminary.

Dr. Tom Schreiner is the James Buchanan Harrison Professor of New Testament Interpretation and Associate Dean of Scripture and Interpretation at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.

Dr. Glen Scorgie is Professor of Theology at Bethel Seminary, San Diego.

Rev. George Shamblin serves at Birmingham Theological Seminary and The Center for Executive Leadership.

Rev. Frank Sindler is a theological educator in Africa.

Rev. Vuyani Sindo is a lecturer at George Whitefield College in South Africa.

Dr. James D. Smith III is Associate Professor of Church History at Bethel Seminary, San Diego, and Adjunct Professor of Religion at the University of San Diego.

Dr. Mark Strauss is Professor of New Testament at Bethel Seminary, San Diego.

Dr. K. Erik Thoennes is Professor of Biblical and Theological Studies at Biola University's Talbot School of Theology and is Chair of the Biblical and Theological Studies Theology Department.

Dr. Derek W. H. Thomas is Professor of Systematic and Historical Theology at Reformed Theological Seminary in Atlanta.

Rev. Pablo Torres is Pastor of Iglesia La Viña in Orlando, FL.

Dr. Oliver L. Trimiew is Associate Professor of Interdisciplinary Studies and Chair of Interdisciplinary Studies Department at Covenant College

Dr. Larry Trotter is Pastor of Florida Coast Church in Pompano Beach, FL, an adjunct professor at Knox Theological Seminary, and formerly, the country director for Mission to the World in Mexico.

Dr. Eric J. Tully is Associate Professor of Old Testament and Semitic Languages at Trinity Evangelical Divinity School.

Dr. Simon Vibert is Senior Pastor of Christ Church Virginia Water, England, and the former Vice Principal and Director of the School of Preaching at Wycliffe Hall, Oxford.

Dr. Carey Vinzant is Assistant Professor of Systematic Theology at Wesley Biblical Seminary.

Dr. Peter Walker is Professor of Biblical Studies at Trinity School for Ministry (formerly tutor in Biblical Studies and Associate Vice-Principal at Wycliffe Hall, Oxford University).

Dr. Guy Waters is Professor of New Testament at Reformed Theological Seminary.

Dr. Stephen Wellum is Professor of Christian Theology at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.

Dr. Donald Whitney is Associate Professor of Biblical Spirituality and the Senior Associate Dean of the School of Theology at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.