# The Book of Acts
# Lesson Two
# Structure and Content

## INTRODUCTION

As a teacher, I sometimes have the opportunity to travel in many countries around the world. Before each trip, I always make sure I understand two important things. First, I need to know where I am going. And second, I have to know how I will get from place to place. Will I take an airplane? Catch a bus? Or use some other form of transportation? Well, something similar is true when we read the book of Acts. It helps to know where the story is going and what literary techniques or strategies Luke uses to guide us to our destination.
This is the second lesson in our series The Book of Acts. In this series, we are exploring the record of the early church as it continued the ministry of Jesus. We have entitled this lesson “Structure and Content” because we will be looking at the ways Luke organized his material, and at the message he intended to teach. 
Our exploration of the structure and content of Acts will divide into three parts. First, we will examine the rhetorical strategy of the book, looking at how Luke’s approach to writing Acts should influence the way we interpret it. Second, we will examine the book’s content, noting the arrangement of its material, and considering how it would have been understood in the first century. And third, we will suggest a model for the modern application of the book, considering how Luke’s ancient message can speak authoritatively in our day. Let’s look first at the rhetorical strategy of the book of Acts.

