## CONTENT

With some of the central dimensions of Luke’s rhetorical strategy in mind, we now turn to our second topic: the content of the book of Acts. While there are many ways to summarize the content of this book, we will focus on the way Luke described the development of the church as the partial realization of God‘s kingdom on earth.
Luke’s two-volume work of the Gospel of Luke and the book of Acts explains how Jesus brought and began to build God’s earthly kingdom through the proclamation of the gospel. In his Gospel, Luke described the foundation that Jesus laid for the kingdom during his earthly ministry. And in the book of Acts, Luke described how Jesus poured out the Holy Spirit to empower the apostles and the church to continue his kingdom-building work. In this way, God’s kingdom is the overarching story of both volumes of Luke’s work. So, as we explore the content of Acts, we will pay special attention to the way the kingdom continued to expand under the leadership of the apostles.
When Jesus commissioned the apostles in Acts 1:8, he instructed them to serve as witnesses, proclaiming the gospel first in Jerusalem, and then spreading out to the rest of the world. Listen once more to Jesus’ words to the apostles in Acts 1:8:

> But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes on you; and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the ends of the earth (Acts 1:8).

Here Jesus laid out a geographical strategy for the gospel witness of the church. Empowered by the Holy Spirit, the apostles were to begin witnessing in Jerusalem, then carry the gospel to Judea and Samaria, and finally to the ends of the earth, expanding the kingdom everywhere they went. 
Many scholars have observed that Luke organized the book of Acts around Jesus’ call for geographical witness expansion. And we will follow this same pattern as we survey his work. We will look first at the way that Luke described the growth of the gospel in Jerusalem in Acts 1:1–8:4. Second, we will turn to the growth of the kingdom in Judea and Samaria in 8:5–9:31. And third, we will focus on the way the church carried the gospel to the ends of the earth in 9:32–28:31. Because this third section is so long, we will pay special attention to it, focusing on four stages of growth suggested by Luke’s summary statements that we have already noted: first, in Phoenicia, Cyprus and Antioch in 9:32–12:25; second, in Cyprus, Phrygia and Galatia in 13:1–15:35; third, in Asia, Macedonia and Achaia in 15:36–21:16; and fourth, all the way to Rome in 21:17–28:31. 
We will look at each of these sections in more detail, focusing on the patterns of internal growth and tension and external growth and opposition that we described earlier. Let’s begin with the way the kingdom in Jerusalem was established through the gospel witness of the apostles in Acts 1:1–8:4.


### JERUSALEM

Jerusalem was the capital city of ancient Israel, God’s special nation in the Old Testament. Jerusalem was the starting point of Luke’s account because of the central role it had played in God’s kingdom throughout the Old Testament, and also in Jesus’ ministry. Moreover, Luke wrote about events in Jerusalem at a number of other places in the book of Acts, regularly showing that the apostles’ work in spreading the gospel to new lands was still rooted in this special city.
Luke reported the growth of the kingdom through the gospel in Jerusalem in four major batches of narratives: first, the anticipation and outpouring of the Spirit in Acts 1 2; second, Peter’s temple sermon and the persecution that followed in Acts 3–4; third, the story of Ananias and Sapphira and the persecution that followed in Acts 5; and fourth, the selection of deacons and the persecution that followed in Acts 6:1–8:4. 
By way of illustration, internal growth appears in a number of well-known events that took place in Jerusalem, such as: 
* The apostles’ commission in Acts 1
* The outpouring of the Holy Spirit on Pentecost in Acts 2
* The experience of miracles in Jerusalem, especially by Peter, in Acts 3, 4 and 5

At the same time, we also see tensions within the Christian community in a number of ways, including: 
* The question of who would become the twelfth apostle in Acts 1
* Ananias and Sapphira’s lie about the money they had donated in Acts 5; and 
* Discrimination against Hellenistic widows in Acts 6

Beyond this, Luke’s record of the gospel witness in Jerusalem also follows the pattern of external growth and opposition. For example:
* On the day of Pentecost, about 3,000 people were added to the church in Acts 2
* Membership in the church grew to around 5,000 when John and Peter were jailed in Acts 4, and 
* Many Jewish priests were added to the church in Acts 6

Even so, as we have already suggested, this outward growth was often set alongside strong opposition from the unbelieving world, such as: 
* The arrest and beating of Peter and John in Acts 5
* The martyrdom of Stephen in Acts 7; and 
* The church’s scattering by persecution from Jerusalem in Acts 8

We might have expected internal tension and outward opposition to discourage the fledgling church in Jerusalem. But under the power of the Holy Spirit, the reality was just the opposite. The gospel witness continued to go forth with great strength, ultimately unhindered in its progress. 


### JUDEA AND SAMARIA

The second major division of Acts focuses on the gospel witness of the church in Judea and Samaria in Acts 8:5–9:31. The regions of Judea and Samaria were roughly equivalent to the southern and northern regions of the Promised Land given to Israel in the Old Testament. Jesus himself had ministered in these regions before his ascension. Luke’s focus on Judea and Samaria can be divided into two main batches of stories: the ministry of Philip in Acts 8:5-40 and the conversion of Paul in Acts 9:1-31. 
These stories draw attention to the internal growth of the church. For instance, internal growth continued as new believers continued to be filled with the Holy Spirit in Acts 8, and Saul was made an apostle after his conversion in Acts 9.
Hand-in-hand with these events, however, tension also built within the church. For example, questions were raised in Acts 8 because some believers had not yet received the Holy Spirit. Simon the magician tried to purchase the power of the Holy Spirit from the apostles in Acts 8.
On the other hand, the pattern of outward growth and opposition also continued. For instance, the church continued to grow numerically in Judea and Samaria through events such as the many converts made through Philip’s evangelistic ministry in Acts 8, and the conversion of Paul in Acts 9.
Even so, this growth did not occur without opposition from unbelievers. For example, Saul persecuted believers before his conversion in Acts 9, and some Jews attempted to assassinate Saul after his conversion in Acts 9.
Once again, internal tension and outward opposition ultimately failed to hinder the church. Instead, the Holy Spirit used these challenges to bring further maturity and numerical growth to the church.

