## CONCLUSION

In this lesson we have looked at the rhetorical strategies Luke used in the book of Acts, the content of his work, and the appropriate first steps to take toward the modern application of his teachings. Our exploration of these issues should provide us with a way to understand, appreciate, and live by his authoritative teachings in our own day.
In many ways, the book of Acts serves as the doorway between the time of Christ and the time of the modern church. It explains how Christ’s person, work and teachings were understood and applied in the early church, and it lays the foundation for the ways modern Christians are to understand and apply those same ideas in our own lives. So, the more we are able to recognize Luke’s purposes and methods in Acts, the better equipped we will be to live in ways that honor and serve our risen King.
 



Dr. Hans F. Bayer (Host) is Professor of New Testament and Chair of the New Testament Department at Covenant Theological Seminary in St. Louis, Missouri. Dr. Bayer received his M.A. and M.Div. from Ashland Theological Seminary, and his Ph.D. from University of Aberdeen in Scotland. Born and raised in Germany, Dr. Bayer taught for ten years at the German Theological Seminary at Giessen, where he also planted and co-pastored a church. He lectures and preaches regularly throughout the U.S. and Europe and has published numerous English and German monographs, essays, dictionary articles, and commentaries, primarily on the Gospels and the Book of Acts. He is also the author of A Theology of Mark: The Dynamic Between Christology and Authentic Discipleship (P&R, 2012).

 
## GLOSSARY
 
 
Ananias – Man who, along with his wife Sapphira, lied about the amount of money they received from the sale of their property when they made a contribution; both were struck dead as punishment (Acts 5)

Apollos – Eloquent Jewish speaker and teacher who worked with the apostle Paul to grow the early church, especially in Ephesus and Corinth

argumentative discourse – Literature that represents a conversation, such as when a writer speaks directly to his audience; literary device used to communicate ideas directly and explicitly

Cornelius – Captain of the Roman army from Caesarea who was converted to Christianity through Peter's ministry (Acts 10–11)

Elymas – Magician from Cyprus who was miraculously made blind, convincing the proconsul to believe the gospel (Acts 13)

 
episodic – Term meaning a successive selection of smaller accounts

narrative discourse – Literature that tells a story; literary device used to communicate ideas and lessons indirectly

Philip – Name of a deacon from the church in Jerusalem; preached the gospel in Samaria and made many converts, including the Ethiopian eunuch; not Philip the apostle 

Priscilla – Woman who, along with her husband Aquila, gave instruction to Apollos in Ephesus

Simon – Magician from Samaria who tried to purchase the power of the Holy Spirit

