# Study Guide 
# Old Testament Foundations
# Module Four – A World of Violence

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for this course’s final exam.

**********************************

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 – 19:20

Introduction 

I. Literary Structure 

      A. Early Violence and Hope 

  	1.   Narratives 

  	2.   Genealogies 

      B. Later Violence and Hope 

  	1.   Sons of God 

  	2.   Nephilim 

 	3.   Afterword 

## REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Explain Dr. Pratt's analysis of the structure of Genesis 4:1-6:8. What kinds of literature are parallel to each other?

2. Explain the narrative of Cain and Abel. Why did Cain kill Abel?

3. Explain the differences in the families of Cain and Seth.

4. What are the different interpretations of the "sons of God" and the "daughters of men" in Genesis 6:1-3? What is Dr. Pratt's view?

5. What does Genesis 6:2 mean when it says that the sons of God married any of the daughters of men that they chose? 

6. What are the different interpretations of the "Nephilim" in Genesis 6:4? What is Dr. Pratt's view?

7. What phrase in Genesis 6.8 gives hope for deliverance from the violence and evil of this period of time? 
 
OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 19:20 – 46:35

II. Original Meaning 

      A. Connections 

  	1. Early Violence and Hope 

  	2. Later Violence and Hope 

      B. Implications 


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. Moses shaped Genesis 4-5 so that Israel would compare Cain's family with the Egyptians. Mention the five parallel associations that Dr. Pratt highlights. 

2. According to Dr. Pratt, why did God reject Cain's offering and prefer Abel's offering? 

3. What name of God was used at the time of Seth, but came to prominence in the time of Moses?

4. Mention the six characteristics found both in the genealogy of Cain's family and in the description of the Egyptians. 

5. How does the Bible describe each of the following sons of Lamech? Jabal, Jubal, and Tubal-Cain.

6. Describe the lineage of the Israelites. Were they descendants of Cain or Seth? They were descendants of which son of Noah? 

7. Was having many children was a sign of God's blessing in the time of Moses?

8. Who was Methuselah? 

9. Where did the Israelites encounter Nephilim?

10. What parallel was Moses making between his role in the life of Israel and the role of Noah in Genesis 5 and 6?

