
### Thematic Outline of the Course

1. Introduction to the Pentateuch
2. A Perfect World
3. Paradise Lost and Found
4. A World of Violence
5. The Right Direction
6. Life of Abraham: Structure, Content, and Original Meaning
7. Life of Abraham: Modern Application
8. The Patriarch Jacob
9. Joseph and His Brothers
1. An Overview of Exodus

### EXPLANATION OF ASSIGNMENTS

*The Multimedia Lessons*

1. Study the lessons, watching the video, listening to the audio, or reading the text.
2. Complete the Study Guide for each lesson. These study guides will prepare you for the online quizzes and help you apply the teachings of the lesson to your own life.
3. Take the online quizzes for each lesson. The quizzes may be taken as many times as you want, but you must wait one hour between each attempt. Your highest grade will be the official grade. We suggest achieving at least an 80% before participating in the weekly discussion to ensure you understand the concepts correctly.
4. Participate in the weekly discussions with your group and Trainer, utilizing that sessions Discussion Guide. These discussions are vital to your full understanding of the course material and your ability to correctly apply the concepts to your life and ministry. We recommend the discussion on the video lessons last at least one hour.
5. Take the Old Testament Foundations – Final Exam. You may take the test again as many times as you want for review, but you must wait one hour between each attempt. The official grade will be your highest grade and we recommend achieving at least an 80% before moving on to the next course.

*Discipleship Badge*

1. One hour each week should be devoted to working through the Discipleship Badge Instructions. This one to two-page guide will provide a general direction for your trainer as you seek to develop this vital ministry skill.
2. In the first few weeks, spend the one hour you have that week walking through the Topics to Discuss given in the Evangelism Badge Instructions.
3. Once a solid foundation has been laid through the group discussion times, spend the remaining weeks working through the badge Action Steps.
4. You will be awarded the badge once your Trainer has determined the completion of the actions steps in light of the Badge Instructions. All badges will be visible in your student “backpack” in the online classroom.

GRADES

The final grade will be calculated as follows:

1. The quizzes on the lectures are each worth 30 points.
2. The final exam on the lectures is worth 100 points.
3. The Discipleship Badge Report won't affect your grade but must be submitted to complete the course.

A total course score above 80% is considered passing.

