# Study Guide 
# Theological Foundations
# Module Nine – Relying on Revelation

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for the final exam of the Theological Foundations course.
.
**********************************

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 – 36:09


Introduction 

I. Finding Revelation 

	A. General Revelation 

  		1. Medium 

  		2. Content 

	B. Special Revelation 

	C. Interconnections 

  		1. Overlap 

  		2. Need 



## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. What is general revelation? What does it teach us?

2. What is special revelation? What does it teach us?

3. Give an example of each of the following types of special revelation, as defined in the video: extraordinary, mixed, and common.

4. Give an example of each of the following types of general revelation, as defined in the video: extraordinary, mixed, and common.

5.Why is special revelation necessary?

6. Make sure you are familiar with the contents of Romans 1:18-32 and Hebrews 1:1-3.


