## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 36:09 - 1:07:25

II. Understanding Revelation 

	A. Hindrance of Sin 

  		1. General Revelation 

  		2. Special Revelation 

	B. Illumination of Holy Spirit 

  		1. Special Revelation 

  		2. General Revelation 

	C. Results 



## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. What are the three points of this section regarding the process of understanding revelation?

2. What are the "noetic" effects of sin? How does sin hinder our understanding God’s general and special revelation?

3. How does the Holy Spirit help us understand God’s special and general revelation?

4. What does Calvin teach about the gifts that God gives even to fallen man?

5. What does Calvin teach about learning truth from non believers?

6. How should we handle apparent conflicts between general and special revelation?

7. According to the lesson, has man's logic been affected by sin? 

8. Make sure you are familiar with the teaching of the following passages:

Romans 1:18
Ephesians 1:17-18
Hebrews 6:4
 
## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 1:07:25 – 1:37:30

III. Developing Confidence 

	A. Analog Quality 

	B. Process of Deference

  		1. Exegesis of Scripture

  		2. Interaction in Community

		3. Christian Living

	C. Appropriate Alignment 

Conclusion



## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. What does Dr. Pratt mean when he speaks of the "analog" view of the levels of confidence in theological convictions?

2. What are the ordinary ways the Holy Spirit leads us to confidence in theological convictions?

3. What is exegesis?

4. Explain the lesson's concept of the "cone of certainty" regarding theological concepts.

5. How can we assign proper levels of confidence to our various beliefs? What questions should we ask?

6. What does the Westminster Confession of Faith teach about how God uses means?

7. According to the lesson, how does Christian living affect our theological convictions?



