# Old Testament Foundations – Module Ten – An Overview of Exodus
## Discussion Questions 

1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	What was the purpose of the book of Exodus? What impact would Exodus have had on Moses’ original audience?


3.	How would you use the book of Exodus to teach or preach? What lessons would you emphasize?


4.	God's identified himself to Israel by a covenant name. Explain how the various forms of his name express the nature of his covenant with the Israelites.


5.	God promised to be present with his people. How and where was his presence displayed? What caused God to threaten to remove his presence, and how did Moses respond?


6.	What relevance does God’s covenant with Moses have for your life and ministry today? 


7.	God will fully defeat his enemies when Jesus returns in judgment. But until that time, how should we respond to injustice? How should we treat our enemies?


8.	When Jesus returns, the time for the reconciliation of sinners to God will end. What impact should this have on the way we evangelize? 


9.	We learn in Exodus that God's laws are his gracious gift to his people. Is it easy or difficult for you to consider God’s laws as gracious blessings? Explain your answer.


10.	In the new heavens and new earth, we will fully obey God's laws. What hope can you take from this, and what hope can you provide those to whom you minister?


11.	God has promised to be present with his people always. Have there been times in your life that you have powerfully experienced the presence of God through his Spirit? If so, explain.

REVIEW STATEMENT on INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS – MODERN APPLICATION: Israel misunderstood the nature of their journey to the Promised Land of Canaan. Once they arrived they thought that was the end of it. They put their roots down, as it were, and failed to be a blessing to the nations. They failed to believe what Abraham knew--that Israel's journey from Egypt to the Promised Land of Canaan was but a foreshadowing of a more important journey--to a City built by God that would be for all people. We know that this refers to the New Jerusalem in the New Heavens and New Earth. So the journey of believers today doesn't necessarily involve a physical moving from one place to another. Rather, it involves living our lives in such a way that we are headed to the Celestial City of God. This world is not our final home. We are pilgrims heading home. 

CASE STUDY: Anita became a Christian when she was in college. Her life changed completely and she was very excited about what Christ had done for her, about the freedom from sin and guilt she was now experiencing, and about the opportunities before her to serve with her gifts. And she did serve others in many ways. Fifteen years later, Anita was married, had four children, and was working part time as a secretary to help pay for the education of her children. That year when she attended the mission conference of her church, she was convicted about the fact that she was no longer as excited as she used to be about being a Christian. She wasn't reaching out to others with her gifts. She realized her love had grown cold. She wondered, "Should we sell everything and become cross-cultural missionaries? What is the problem? What happened?"
## Reflection Questions 
1.	Do you know people who are professing Christians but who, forgetting they are pilgrims heading home, have put their roots down into this world? Discuss this in your learning community. How does “putting your roots down” show what you love? 
2.	Write a possible description of a professing Christian, who forgetting he is a pilgrim heading home, have put their roots down into this world. Consider the following and add your own: 
a.	Little prayer life. 
b.	Little witnessing to unbelievers.
c.	Focus on the accumulation of material possessions. 
d.	Focus on becoming well-known. 
e.	What else… 
## Action Assignments	
•	To what extent have you put down your roots down and forgotten to be a pilgrim heading home? Write down your answer and share it with someone you respect for their spiritual growth in order to get the perspective of someone else. 
•	If you decide you need to work on being more of a pilgrim, write a list of your goals with dates and accomplishments. This will include examining what you love and enjoy, and how that affects your actions. 
