Kingdom and Covenant in the New Testament
Lesson One
Why Study New Testament Theology?


INTRODUCTION

Have you ever wondered what makes a tree a tree? Or a house a house? Or a person a person? Or to ask it another way, what qualities must something possess before we call it a tree or a house? These are complex questions that philosophers have been pondering for thousands of years. And we face a similar question when we approach the study of Christian theology. After all, there are countless churches that we would consider to be “Christian,” and many of them disagree about many things. So, it’s useful to ask, “What doctrines are fundamental and essential to Christian theology?”
Now, of course, as we ask this question, we need to be clear that individuals can be saved even if they have a very poor understanding of theology. Our commitment to Christ is sufficient to make us Christians. At the same time, it’s fair to say that there are several essential ideas that must be present in any theological system before it deserves to be called “Christian.” And since the early centuries of the church, the Apostles’ Creed has provided a useful summary of these core beliefs.
This is the first lesson in our series on The Apostles’ Creed, a well-known and widely used summary of what Christians believe. We have entitled this lesson “The Articles of Faith” because we will be looking at the Apostles’ Creed as a summary of the articles or doctrines that must be affirmed by all those who would call themselves “Christian.” The Apostles’ Creed appeared in various forms during the early centuries of the church. But it was standardized by about A.D. 700 in Latin. A popular modern English translation reads as follows:

I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth. I believe in Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord, Who was conceived by the Holy Spirit, And born of the Virgin Mary. He suffered under Pontius Pilate, Was crucified, died, and was buried; He descended into hell. The third day he rose again from the dead. He ascended into heaven And is seated at the right hand of God the Father Almighty. From there he will come to judge the living and the dead. I believe in the Holy Spirit, The holy catholic church, The communion of saints, The forgiveness of sins, The resurrection of the body, And the life everlasting. Amen. 
Our discussion of the Apostles’ Creed as the articles of faith will divide into three parts. First, we will speak of the history of the creed. Second, we will provide an overview of its statements. And third, we will focus on the importance of its doctrines for today. Let’s begin with the history behind the Apostles’ Creed.



HISTORY

As we survey the history of the Apostles’ Creed, we will focus on two matters. On the one hand, we will look at the development of the creed, considering things like its authorship and date of composition. And on the other hand, we will look at the purpose of the creed, the reason the church thought it was important to create and to use it. We’ll turn first to historical development of the Apostles’ Creed.


DEVELOPMENT

It was once believed and taught that the Apostles’ Creed was written in the first century by the twelve apostles themselves. It was even said that each apostle contributed one of the creed’s twelve distinct theological statements. However, there is virtually no evidence that this took place, or even that any apostles were directly involved in the writing of the creed. But if the apostles didn’t write the creed, who did? 

The question of who wrote the Apostles’ Creed is an open one because we do not have an author signed up for it. Almost certainly though these questions are questions that were asked of baptismal candidates going back perhaps as far back as 40 or 50 years after Christ. So, a person would be asked, do you believe in God the Father, maker of heaven and earth? And we know this because a number of people talking about their baptismal experience will refer to various of these questions. And by 200 A.D., Tertullius refers to what is called the Old Roman Creed which is almost identical to the Apostles’ Creed and he refers to it in terms of those baptismal questions, “Do you believe…?” “Do you believe…?” … The first reference to the Apostles’ Creed, per se, is by a man named Rufinus in 390 A.D., and he relates the story that each of the twelve apostles, including Matthias who replaced Judas, gave one of the affirmations in the creed. There really is no proof for that theory, but the idea that in fact, these affirmations go all the way back to the apostles certainly has good basis. 

—	Dr. John Oswalt


In the writings of early Christians, there are many lists of essential doctrines that resemble the Apostles’ Creed. On the one hand, there are rules of faith that catalog and explain fundamental beliefs in some detail. The writings of the early church fathers indicate that written rules of faith summarized the beliefs and practices of the churches that produced them. For example, Origen included a rule of faith in the beginning of his work, On First Principles, and Irenaeus included one in book 1, chapter 10 of his famous work Against Heresies. Rules of faith like these were intended to preserve the teachings of the church, and were used to train its people — especially its leaders. Often, these rules varied from congregation to congregation. Generally speaking, they included affirmations of important doctrines, as well as moral teachings and traditions. 
On the other hand, some ancient doctrinal lists are in the form of creeds. These were short lists that summarized the doctrinal portions of the church’s rule of faith, especially its most critical beliefs. These were often recited in liturgical settings, such as baptisms. In the first and second centuries, it may have been the case that each local congregation had its own creed, or way of summarizing essential biblical truth. But by the third or fourth century, some creeds were rising to greater prominence and being used in multiple churches. 
One ancient creed that rose to prominence in this manner was the creed from the church in Rome, often called the Roman Creed. This creed is so similar to the Apostles’ Creed that many scholars believe the Apostles’ Creed to be simply a later version of the Roman Creed. But regardless of its precise origins, what is beyond question is that the Apostles’ Creed eventually came into widespread use, especially in Western churches. In the early centuries, its precise wording varied somewhat from church to church. But in the eighth century the wording was generally standardized into the form that we recognize and use today.
With this understanding of the historical development of the creed in mind, we should look at the purpose behind the creation and use of the Apostles’ Creed.


PURPOSE

In our day, many Christians are suspicious of creeds, and it isn’t difficult to understand why. Although very few people would outspokenly claim that a creed has the same authority as Scripture, sometimes well-meaning Christians treat certain creeds if they were equal to the Bible itself. But no creed should ever be elevated to this level in theory or in practice. 
The Bible is our only inspired, infallible rule of faith and practice. Creeds, on the other hand, are fallible teaching tools that summarize our understanding of Scripture. And as we are about to see, the Apostles’ Creed was created to help Christians learn and remain true to the teachings of the Bible.
We will investigate the purpose of the Apostles’ Creed in three steps. First, we will look at Scripture as the original repository of true doctrine. Second, we will look at the churches’ traditional teachings as affirmations of Scripture. And third, we will see that the Apostles’ Creed was intended to summarize the churches’ traditional understandings of Scripture. Let’s begin with the fact that dedicated Christians have always affirmed that Scripture is the basis of our doctrine.

Scripture

Listen to the words of the early church father Origen in the Preface to his work On First Principles, written in the early third century:

All who believe … derive the knowledge which incites men to a good and happy life from no other source than from the very words and teachings of Christ. And by the words of Christ, we do not mean those only which He spoke when He became man … for before that time, Christ, the Word of God, was in Moses and the prophets… Moreover … after His ascension into heaven He spoke in His apostles.

Origen taught that Scripture in all its parts was the word of Christ, and that it was the source of all true doctrine. And listen to the words of the early third-century bishop Hippolytus, in section 9 of his work Against the Heresy of One Noetus:

There is, brethren, one God, the knowledge of whom we gain from the Holy Scriptures, and from no other source.

The early churches believed that the whole Bible was Christ’s word, given to believers by the apostles. In this regard, they affirmed the concept that theologians often call sola Scriptura or Scripture alone. This is the perspective that Scripture is the only infallible rule of faith, and the final arbiter in any theological controversy. 
We find a clear example of this in the writings of Basil, who was elected bishop of Caesarea in A.D. 370. Basil was a strong defender of the traditions or customs of the church, and often expressed his beliefs that these traditions could be traced back to the apostles. Nevertheless, when there was a question about the truthfulness of these traditions, he appealed to Scripture as the final authority. Listen to Basil’s words in his Letter 189, written to Eustathius the Physician:

Let God-inspired Scripture decide between us; and on whichever side be found doctrines in harmony with the word of God, in favor of that side will be cast the vote of truth.

Here Basil admitted that some churches affirmed one set of customary ideas in their rule of faith, while other churches had contradictory customs. So, he appealed to Scripture as the highest authority to settle the matter.
The early church relied strongly on Scripture as the basis for all its doctrine. But they still depended on the traditional teachings of the church to summarize and protect the teachings of Scripture.


Traditional Teachings

Now, it’s reasonable to wonder why the church felt it was necessary to preserve its traditional teachings. Wasn’t it enough simply to preserve the Bible, and to let the Bible speak for itself?

Well, there’s a need to formulate concise, clear statements on what the church believes, especially because there are false teachers who teach things that aren’t in line with what the apostles taught and what the Bible teaches. And so, especially in response to these false teachings, the church needed to formulate a clear summary statement on what it believed.

—	Dr. K. Erik Thoennes


The church had the Scriptures as the basis of its faith, but of course, the Scriptures were very long and literacy was very limited. So, it was best for the church to summarize basic doctrines in one creed in order for people to understand and comprehend the faith without having to read the entire Bible. 

—	Dr. Riad Kassis, translation


The Apostles’ Creed was especially valuable, even necessary in early church history because the Canon of Scripture was not formally listed until around A.D. 397. So, what was the authoritative faith of the church? It was summarized in the Apostles’ Creed. But at that time, we had the Bible. So, why should we continue to have the creed? Because we can’t require people to understand the whole Bible before we accept them as Christians. The Apostles’ Creed still summarizes the essential teachings of the Bible in a simple way. And for this reason, it must continue to be used even now. 

—	Dr. Paul Chang, translation

False teachers created many problems in the church. Some even denied central aspects of the gospel itself. In response to these circumstances, godly Christian leaders created short summaries of the central teachings of Scripture so that all Christians would know and affirm the basic content of the faith. Listen to the way Origen described the problem in another section of the Preface to his work On First Principles:

There are many who think they hold the opinions of Christ, and yet some of these think differently from their predecessors, yet as the teaching of the Church, transmitted in orderly succession from the apostles, and remaining in the Churches to the present day, is still preserved, that alone is to be accepted as truth which differs in no respect from ecclesiastical and apostolical tradition.

INTRODUCTION

If you've ever seriously studied a work of art, a piece of literature, a play or a movie, then you know that there can be a big difference between enjoying it casually and analyzing it carefully. Detailed analysis can be a very consuming task, much different from just doing it when we want and how we want. But at the end of the day, you and I know that few things can replace the rich knowledge that comes from a meticulous analysis of a subject or piece.
In many ways, this is the kind of experience followers of Christ often have when it comes to the New Testament. We know the joy of reading these Scriptures here and there, now and then. But the insights we get from carefully studying the New Testament and its theology can really be a source of great fulfillment. 
This is the first lesson in our series Kingdom and Covenant in the New Testament. In this series we'll follow a very traditional definition of theology and speak of New Testament theology as everything that the New Testament teaches about God himself and other topics in relation to God. We've entitled this first lesson "Why Study New Testament Theology?" In this lesson, we want to see why it's important to go beyond a casual familiarity with the New Testament and devote ourselves to the careful, in-depth study of New Testament theology. 
In 2 Timothy 2:15, the apostle Paul referred to the fact that understanding New Testament theology often requires hard work. Listen to what Paul told Timothy:

Do your best to present yourself to God as one approved, a worker who does not need to be ashamed and who correctly handles the word of truth (2 Timothy 2:15).

Of course, many dimensions of New Testament theology are quite simple. But Paul made it clear that understanding Scripture is not always easy. Timothy was to be "a worker … who correctly handles the word of truth." The Greek term translated "worker" is "ergates," a term that often referred to physical laborers. Paul's metaphor indicated that grasping the theology of the New Testament often requires hard labor. But if studying New Testament theology is so difficult, why should we do it? 

It’s really interesting that Paul, in his letter to Timothy, just in the space of a few words, says both that the Scriptures were given by the Spirit of God — they are “God-breathed” — but then just a few sentences later Paul says to Timothy, study, work hard to show yourself approved as a workman of God, studying and rightly handling the Scriptures. The Scriptures really reflect a covenantal relationship with God, God's gracious initiative to communicate with us but also our responsibility, our response to his Word. And because he has given his Word in language that we can understand — he’s accommodated himself to speak through human authors in using genre and language and forms that were familiar to the people and places of the time — we need to work hard in terms of learning that language, in terms of learning how genre works, how historical narrative works differently from poetry or differently from personal correspondence, because these different forms are used in the Scriptures. And just in terms of reading the Bible contextually, understanding how New Testament authors make use of the Old Testament in different ways that were common to the time in terms of how prior texts were used in a particular situation. So, Paul tells Timothy both, that the Scriptures are God-inspired from the Holy Spirit, but also that Timothy — and we, like Timothy — should work hard and should study to show ourselves approved and rightly handling the Scriptures.

— Dr. Greg Perry 

We'll explore why we should study New Testament theology in two ways. First, we'll examine the importance of understanding the New Testament's inspiration and authority. And second, we'll consider the challenge of dealing with the continuities and discontinuities between the days of the New Testament and our day. Let's look more closely at both of these issues, beginning with the New Testament's inspiration and authority.



INSPIRATION & AUTHORITY

To investigate the inspiration and authority of the New Testament, we'll focus on the Bible's affirmations that the New Testament is both inspired and authoritative. And then, we'll offer a few clarifications for what we mean by "inspiration" and "authority." Let's begin with the biblical affirmations of these crucial Christian beliefs. 


AFFIRMATIONS

When followers of Christ reflect on the inspiration and authority of the New Testament, they almost always appeal to 2 Timothy 3:16 where the apostle Paul wrote: 

All Scripture is God-breathed and is useful for teaching, rebuking, correcting and training in righteousness (2 Timothy 3:16). 

Here we find that Paul touched on the inspiration of the Scriptures when he said that "all Scripture is God-breathed," or as the Greek word "theopneustos" may be translated, "exhaled by God." He also referred to the authority of Scripture when he said that the Scriptures are "useful for teaching, rebuking, correcting and training in righteousness." This is an important passage for understanding what followers of Christ believe about the New Testament. But now listen to 2 Timothy 3:15 where Paul told Timothy: 

From infancy you have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make you wise for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus (2 Timothy 3:15).

Strictly speaking, "the Holy Scriptures" that Paul had in mind here, and that Timothy had known "from infancy," were not the New Testament, but the Old Testament. So, why then do followers of Christ appeal to Paul's words about the Old Testament when they refer to the New Testament as being inspired and authoritative? 
We'll look at three biblical affirmations that help us understand that the New Testament is inspired and authoritative. First, we'll explore Jesus' calling of twelve disciples. Second, we'll consider the foundational role of the apostles and prophets. And third, we'll affirm the inspiration and authority of the New Testament books themselves. Let's look first at how Jesus' calling of twelve disciples affirms the inspiration and authority of the New Testament. 


Twelve Disciples

As Jesus began establishing a new remnant of God's people to fulfill God's purposes in Israel, he called out a special group of twelve disciples. The Gospels make it clear that Jesus set these twelve disciples apart from the others who followed him. And this distinction made them, with the exception of Judas, the ones whom he later sent into the world as his authoritative apostles.
In John 16:13 we read these words from Jesus to his twelve disciples: 

When he, the Spirit of truth, comes, he will guide you into all truth. He will not speak on his own; he will speak only what he hears, and he will tell you what is yet to come (John 16:13).

This passage indicates that there was much Jesus' disciples had to learn. So, "the Spirit of truth" would come and "guide [them] into all truth" about "what [was] yet to come." We see here that Jesus ordained his select disciples to teach the rest of his followers through the Holy Spirit. This and similar passages confirm our belief in the inspiration of the New Testament.
Now, the apostle Paul, who wrote much of the New Testament, was not one of the original twelve. But the Bible is clear that Paul was an authoritative apostle, and he met the requirements equal to those established for the twelve in Acts 1:21-22. This is one reason why Luke reported Paul's encounter with Christ on the road to Damascus three times: first in Acts 9:1-19, then in 22:6-11, and once more in 26:9-18. And Galatians 1:11¬–2:10 conveys that Paul spent three years with Christ in the desert of Arabia. This same passage also reports that the apostles in Jerusalem confirmed Paul's apostolic authority. As Paul put it in 1 Corinthians 15:8-9, after Jesus had appeared to more than 500 believers: 

[Jesus] appeared to me also, as to one abnormally born. For I am the least of the apostles and do not even deserve to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God (1 Corinthians 15:8-9).

As an apostle, Paul called himself "one abnormally born" and "the least of the apostles." He was the only authoritative apostle who had not been with Jesus during his earthly ministry. But Paul was a witness to the resurrection of Jesus and approved as such by the original apostles in Jerusalem. 
With the affirmations related to Jesus' calling of his twelve disciples in mind, we should also mention the inspiration and foundational authority of Christ's first century apostles and prophets. 


Apostles and Prophets

Listen to the way Paul, in Ephesians 3:4-5, referred to the fact that not only he but all of Christ's apostles and prophets were the recipients of God's special revelation: 

My insight into the mystery of Christ … has now been revealed by the Spirit to God's holy apostles and prophets (Ephesians 3:4-5).

Here Paul referred to distinctively Christian teachings that had been kept secret, or a "mystery," until they were "revealed by the Spirit to God's holy apostles and prophets." It's not surprising, then, that in Ephesians 2:20-21 Paul also referred to the first century apostles and prophets in this way:

[The church was] built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, with Christ Jesus himself as the chief cornerstone. In him the whole building is joined together and rises to become a holy temple in the Lord (Ephesians 2:20-21).

As this passage tells us, God is building the church into "a holy temple in the Lord," and Christ Jesus is "the chief cornerstone." But notice also that Paul identified "the apostles and prophets" as part of "the foundation" of the church. This indicates that God established the church of Christ on the authoritative teachings of the apostles and prophets. And as we saw in our earlier verse, the apostolic and prophetic teachings were authoritative because they were inspired by the Holy Spirit. 
In addition to the Bible's affirmations of Jesus' twelve disciples and the foundational authority of Christ's apostles and prophets, we should also note that the apostles themselves considered the New Testament books equal to the Old Testament Scriptures. This point of view appears in a number of places in the New Testament, but we'll look at just two examples.


