#### Authority 

All Evangelicals rightly believe that the New Testament has authority over our lives. But we need to be careful to understand the nature of this authority. Sadly, many well-meaning Christians fail to keep in mind that the New Testament was not written directly to them. To put it another way, the New Testament was written for us, but not directly to us. We all know that the New Testament was written thousands of years ago and given to other people living in those days. But this fact often has little impact on the ways we acknowledge the New Testament's authority. All of this is to say something very important about the authority of the New Testament: New Testament theology has full, but indirect authority over the lives of Christ's followers today. And this fact means that we must always be ready to learn as much as possible about what New Testament texts meant for their original audiences.
When followers of Christ first begin to read the New Testament they're usually drawn to its relatively basic teachings. They read things like, "Jesus is Lord," "Repent and believe the gospel," "Love one another," and a host of other essential teachings. They don't have to consider much about the historical circumstances, personalities and purposes of New Testament authors. For all practical purposes, they can treat these basic teachings as if they're simply timeless truths. And they seldom deal much with the implications of submitting to the authority of the New Testament. But as we learn more about New Testament theology, it becomes more and more evident that we have to look carefully at the original settings of New Testament texts in order to acknowledge their authority properly today. We have to learn about the authors' backgrounds, circumstances, and intentions. Only then can we submit appropriately to the New Testament's authority over our lives. 

> One of the questions that comes up is, how can we consider the New Testament, which was written to other people, authoritative for us? Now, first of all, it’s authoritative in the sense that it has the right or power to compel assent. And the link between the original recipients of the canonical writings and ourselves are two, the links are two. First of all, the author, the divine author of this text is the same yesterday, today and forever. He’s the one with whom we too must deal. And secondly, as followers of Jesus Christ, we belong to the covenant people of God, and those things that were said specifically to some of our members centuries ago were meant to include us as well because we belong with them in the embrace of God through Jesus Christ our Lord.
— Dr. Glen G. Scorgie

Perhaps an analogy will help to clarify what we have in mind. Parents who have more than one child know very well how they exercise full, but often indirect, authority over their children. Imagine a parent who scolds his or her son for misbehavior and says to him, "Go sit down and think about what you've done." Of course, his sister is happy to keep playing. After all, the parent wasn't speaking to her. But if the sister disobeys the parent a few moments later, the parent may very well say, "Didn't you see what just happened to your brother?" In situations like this, parents expect all of their children to learn from the way they dealt with one child. This indirect authority teaches all of the children how they should behave, even if they weren't the initial recipients of the discipline. 
This is what we mean when we say that organic inspiration leads to the full but indirect authority of the New Testament for modern followers of Christ. New Testament texts spoke directly with full authority to the original audiences. And we must remember that they also speak with full authority today. For faithful followers of Christ, it's never a question of if we are to submit to a teaching of the New Testament. It's only a question of how we are to submit to its authority. So, to determine how we should respond to this authority, we must be ready to look back to the original purpose and circumstances of when a particular text was written.

> One of the questions students often ask about God's Word is, how can a message given to people 2,000 years ago be applicable to us? How can this be God's word to us or for us? And I think there's the key right there, is, though these texts are not God's word to us, they are ultimately God's word for us. And the one thing that every book in the Bible, every genre, every situation has in common is that every book in the Bible reveals the nature of God, who God is. It reveals who we are in relationship to him. And it reveals God's purpose for us in the world, how we're to respond to him and how to respond to one another. So, ultimately, what we learn in Scripture is we learn the heart of God. We learn the nature and purpose of God. And we can learn that even if it's written to different people in different contexts, even if the direct commands given to them don't apply to us directly, we still learn about God's nature, about God's purpose, about who we are and how we ought to live in relationship to God. So, ultimately, I would say the Bible teaches us the heart of God and the purpose of God, and so it then guides us into how to live in relationship to him and in relationship to one another.
— Dr. Mark L. Strauss 

For example, in Matthew 19:21, Jesus gave this specific instruction to a rich young ruler:

> If you want to be perfect, go, sell your possessions and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven. Then come, follow me (Matthew 19:21). 

How are we to apply this passage to our lives? Are all of us, in every circumstance, to "sell [our] possessions and give to the poor"? The only way we can answer this question responsibly is to grasp who this rich young ruler was and why Jesus addressed him in this way. 
This man's title and interaction with Jesus would suggest that he was of Jewish background and had a good deal of financial influence in his community. It also appears that he cared deeply about upholding Jewish customs. Earlier in the chapter he asked Jesus, "Teacher, what good thing must I do to get eternal life?" Jesus replied, "Obey the commandments." The young man proudly declared that he had done this. So, Jesus addressed what seemed to be the man's chief concern, mainly wealth and influence. 
Scripture repeatedly shows us that owning possessions is not, in and of itself, evil. Nor does it prevent us from true discipleship under Christ. However, as Jesus' followers, our hearts should always be prepared to forsake our own desires in order to serve God. 
Another example of this occurs in Acts 5:1-11 where Ananias and Sapphira pretend to give all their money to the church, but secretly keep some for themselves. The sin wasn't that they did not give all they had — they weren't asked to — but rather that they lied about their generosity to receive popular approval. 
Jesus' response to the rich young ruler to sell his possessions didn't deal specifically with money, but rather with the man's concern for what he must sacrifice. Jesus cut to the heart of the matter by addressing the one thing this man was unwilling to forsake, his wealth.
This example helps us understand that if we are to submit to the authority of Scripture, we need to consider the context and original purpose of a passage. Only then will we be able to assess how we are to observe what Jesus has commanded. 

> The New Testament, as the Old Testament, is not a philosophy; it doesn't consist of philosophical formulation, formulated in a manner that perhaps could be transported across cultures very easily. The New Testament is specific; it is historical. The reason for that is pretty obvious. God revealed himself both in the Old Testament and the New Testament, and when God reveals himself, he reveals himself to specific people. He doesn't reveal himself in generalities that then, at the end of the day, would probably not be relevant for anyone because they would be so general. So, God revealed himself to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David, to Isaiah, to Jeremiah and then, through Jesus, to the disciples, to Peter, to Paul. And so, we have specific people in specific circumstances. And this is so by necessity. God is the Creator and creation exists in time and space, and so when God reveals himself, he does need to reveal himself in time and space. 
— Dr. Eckhard J. Schnabel

So far in our lesson on "Why study New Testament Theology?" we've seen that the New Testament's inspiration and authority require us to learn as much as we can about the ancient historical setting of a New Testament book. Now we're ready to address the continuities and discontinuities between our day and the days of the New Testament
