#### Discontinuities

> Our understanding of Scripture is that it is the Word of God, and the ultimate author of Scripture is the Holy Spirit. We oftentimes will speak about Scripture in those exalted terms, and so the question sometimes arises, well, why do we need anything beyond the Scriptures? Why do we need to study the culture and the backgrounds and the languages? If we have the Scriptures themselves and they are the Word of God, are they not sufficient? We understand that the Holy Spirit is the ultimate author, but the Holy Spirit also worked through human authors and gave us the Scriptures in historical context. We don't have Scripture before us that is just a list of propositional truths. We don't have Scripture that is a legal codebook that just has law upon law, do's and don'ts in a list. We don't have Scripture that is just wisdom sayings — one maxim, one aphorism, one proverb one after the other — and we somehow compile truth from that. Although those elements are in the Scriptures, the Scriptures are a revelation of God, a revelation of God and God's acts in history. We sometimes summarize our understanding of Scripture by saying it is the word of God in the words of human authors given in history. And it's that "in history" part that is so important to us. If we don't understand the cultural context in which the Scriptures were written, if we don't understand the language, the Scriptures can be easily misconstrued.
— Dr. Edward M. Keazirian

In reality, many of the cultural outlooks in our day and in New Testament times are vastly different. And we have to work very hard to overcome the obstacles they present to interpreting and applying New Testament theology.
One of the most obvious examples of this kind of cultural discontinuity is the language that was used to write the New Testament. Relatively few followers of Christ today can read the New Testament in its original Greek.
Beyond this, we have to consider first century literary conventions and the influence of the Hebrew and Greek versions of the Old Testament used by New Testament authors. We must also overcome our ignorance of the political, economic and
broader social practices of the day. Only as we devote ourselves to these tasks will we be able to deal with the many cultural discontinuities between the New Testament and our day.

> There's a wonderful saying in London. It's called, "Mind the gap." You hear that when you step off the underground subway and onto the platform, and there's a gap in between, and there's this warning that's constantly given: "Mind the gap. Mind the gap." And that is an important idea to consider of why the importance of understanding the cultural context of the New Testament, when we're interpreting and teaching and preaching the New Testament, is that we need to "mind the gap." There's a gap between then and now. There's a gap in the language that was used. There's a gap in how the social identities were created. There's a gap in how kinship was understood. There's a gap in almost every aspect of life 2,000 years ago and life today. And if we don't mind the gap, we will inevitably fill the gap with our own culture, with our own understanding of things. Instead of listening to the text to see how the text now applies to our life, we actually do the reverse. We make our life the manner for understanding the text. We speak into the text instead of the text speaking to us. And so we will miss some things... If we believe that
the original message was inspired, then we want to endeavor to mind the gap so we can listen to the Word of God, not so that we can impose our own social consideration.
— Dr. Mark A. Jennings
 
With the continuities and discontinuities of these epochal considerations and cultural considerations in mind, let's look at why personal considerations also require us to study New Testament theology carefully.

#### PERSONAL

We all know from common experience that people aren't exactly the same. Even people who live in the same culture are different. Often, when we meet people from distant places or read about people from the past, we realize that the psychological, emotional, and spiritual differences can be enormous. We all have different experiences, strengths, fears, talents, spiritual propensities; the list of differences among people is very long. So, when we study New Testament theology we must give due attention to the similarities and differences between people in our day and in the days of the New Testament.
We'll look at personal considerations along the same lines as our previous discussions. First, what are the personal continuities between modern and New Testament people? And second, what are the discontinuities between them? Let's start with the continuities.

#### Continuities

From a biblical perspective, there are enough similarities among people for us to be confident that we can learn and apply New Testament theology as we ought. In effect, the Scriptures teach that all human beings in New Testament times and today are the same kinds of people. The authors, audiences and other human figures in the New Testament were the image of God, just like we are today. They were rational and reasoned, like us. They reacted with joy and sadness, much like we do today. And like us, they were fallen images of God who needed redemption in Christ. They struggled with sin, and endured pain and hardship in this fallen world. And those who believed in Christ in New Testament days experienced the grace of God's forgiveness and the blessing of the Holy Spirit in their personal lives, just as we do today. Because of these and many other personal continuities, when we read the New Testament we are often able to connect easily with the people of that time.
For example, in Romans 9:2-4, Paul expressed his deep feelings for his fellow Jews in this way:

> I have great sorrow and unceasing anguish in my heart. For I could wish that I myself were cursed and cut off from Christ for the sake of my brothers, those of my own race, the people of Israel (Romans 9:2- 4).

These verses reveal Paul's very personal, emotional experience. And human personality has not changed so much from Paul's day to our own that we cannot empathize with his feelings. Personal continuities like these often make it relatively easy for us to grasp what New Testament authors, audiences and characters experienced. And we can apply their experiences to our own day.
At the same time, while personal considerations in the New Testament contain a number of personal continuities, there are also many personal discontinuities that make it difficult for us to understand and apply New Testament theology.

#### Discontinuities
The New Testament often addresses particular kinds of people that are so different from what we know today that we sometimes struggle to draw the proper connections. Personal, emotional tendencies, even issues like age and gender can present obstacles that must be overcome through careful study.

> God cares about people in all of our different kinds of settings, all of our different kinds of backgrounds. We can see that by how many different kinds of backgrounds and how many different cultures, actually, were addressed throughout the Bible, in different parts of
the Bible. And in the same way, once we understand how God was speaking to those people in their settings, we can learn from them as examples, and we're going to have to reapply those in our own different settings today. God gave it in concrete ways for particular settings, and he expects it to be applied in concrete ways and particular settings. But it's important that we get the right principles that are there in the text so we can reapply them in the right ways.
— Dr. Craig S. Keener

For example, in Ephesians 6:5, 9, Paul instructed two particular kinds of people. He said:

> Slaves, obey your earthly masters with respect and fear, and with sincerity of heart, just as you would obey Christ... And masters, treat your slaves in the same way (Ephesians 6:5, 9).

When most of us read these words, we gain a superficial awareness of what Paul said to the slaves and masters in the church at Ephesus. But our awareness of the struggles these brothers and sisters in Christ faced is severely limited because the vast majority of us have never been slaves or masters.
These were very different kinds of people than we are today. And for this reason, we should work vigorously to learn what these people experienced in the first century in places like Ephesus. Only then can we begin to draw the appropriate parallels for our own day and understand Paul's theological perspectives offered in this passage.

> Anytime we try to understand how to apply the New Testament, the key word that has to come out all the time is "context." As much as we might like to have the application of Scripture be very cut and dried, almost wooden, that wasn't the case even in New Testament times. I've always been fascinated by the fact that Paul in one case says, "Yes, Timothy, you must be circumcised for the sake of the gospel." And in another case he says to another one of his companions, "No, you must not be circumcised, for the sake of the gospel." So, the same act was right or wrong depending on the cultural setting, if you will. In one case it was, "Timothy, you must be circumcised so we can reach the Jews." That's for the sake of the gospel. In the other setting it was, I believe it was Titus, "You must not be circumcised because the people who want you to be circumcised think that's what's required for salvation, and that would be opposed to the gospel." So, we need to really understand what our current cultural situation is and how the biblical principles apply to that. And that means we need to really understand the culture as much as we understand Scripture.
— Dr. Dan Lacich

The healthy and the sick, the disabled, the strong, the weak, the rich, the poor, young and old, fathers, mothers, sisters and brothers in the days of the New Testament had to embrace New Testament theology in ways that were appropriate for who they were in their day. To one degree or another, these and similar personal factors will always affect how we apply New Testament theology to our day as well. And these personal considerations press us all to study the New Testament with diligence.

## CONCLUSION
 
In this lesson, we've explored why followers of Christ should study New Testament theology. We've looked at the New Testament's inspiration and authority and seen that we should give ourselves to study because the New Testament is breathed out by God. We also considered how the epochal, cultural and personal continuities and discontinuities between New Testament times and ours require us to devote ourselves to understanding and applying New Testament theology.
The New Testament is the kind of book that deserves much more than a casual glance. As God's Word for his church, we must be ready to do whatever it takes to understand it as well as we possibly can. We'll focus on several important ways to pursue
this goal in the lessons that follow. And as we do, we'll see many of the benefits that come from careful reflection on this part of the Bible. And we'll see, time and again, why we should give ourselves to the study New Testament theology.



Dr. Simon Vibert (Host) is Vice Principal of Wycliffe Hall of the University of Oxford where he also serves as Director of the School of Preaching. Dr. Vibert received his Th.M. from Glasgow University, his D.Min. from Reformed Theological Seminary, and his Postgraduate Diploma in Learning and Teaching in Higher Education from the University of Oxford. He is a Trustee of Latimer Trust, a member of the Church of England Evangelical Council, and served as Chairman of the Fellowship of Word and Spirit. Dr. Vibert also served for 8 years as Vicar of St. Luke's Church Wimbledon Park. He has produced numerous books and theological articles, including Excellence in Preaching: Learning from the Best (IVP, 2011); Stress: The Path to Peace (Inter-Varsity Press, 2014); and Lives Jesus Changed (Christian Focus Publications, 2010).
Dr. Mark A. Jennings is Instructor of New Testament at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary.
Dr. Edward M. Keazirian is Assistant Professor of Greek and Director of the Greek Language Program at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary.
Dr. Craig S. Keener is the F.M. and Ada Thompson Chair of Biblical Studies at Asbury Theological Seminary
Dr. Dan Lacich is a pastor at Northland, A Church Distributed in Orlando, FL.
Dr. Jason Oakes is Associate Professor of Biblical and Theological Studies at Talbot
School of Theology.
Dr. Greg Perry is Associate Professor of New Testament and Director of City Ministry Initiative at Covenant Theological Seminary
Rev. Ric Rodeheaver is Senior Pastor of Christ Community Church in Laguna Hills, California.
Dr. Eckhard J. Schnabel is the Mary F. Rockefeller Distinguished Professor of New Testament Studies at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary.
Dr. Glen G. Scorgie is Professor of Theology at Bethel Seminary, San Diego.
Dr. Mark L. Strauss is Professor of New Testament at Bethel Seminary, San Diego.
Dr. Stephen J. Wellum is Professor of Christian Theology at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.
