UNIFYING
	
Maybe you have met sincere Christians who resist learning theology because they are convinced that doctrine only divides Christians against each other. They spread this resistance to formal theology with slogans like: “Jesus unites us, but doctrine divides us.” And there is a measure of truth in this position. Christians throughout the ages have separated from each other, condemned each other, persecuted each other and even waged wars over doctrinal matters. Even so, the New Testament still encourages the church to strive for doctrinal unity. For instance, in Ephesians 4:11-13, we read these words:

[Jesus] gave some to be apostles, some to be prophets, some to be evangelists, and some to be pastors and teachers ... so that the body of Christ may be built up until we all reach unity in the faith and in the knowledge of the Son of God and become mature, attaining to the whole measure of the fullness of Christ (Ephesians 4:11-13).

In this passage, Paul referred to the church as the body of Christ. And he indicated that the church cannot reach maturity in Christ until we are united in faith and in knowledge. For this reason, doctrinal unity should be the goal of every Christian.
Of course, many other aspects of our Christian life should influence our study of doctrine. We need to do things like love God and our neighbors, pursue holiness, rely on the power of the Holy Spirit, and meditate on God and his word. When we simply focus on doctrine and ignore other concerns, we often go badly astray. 
As the apostle Paul warned in 1 Corinthians 13:2:

If I ... can fathom all mysteries and all knowledge ... but have not love, I am nothing (1 Corinthians 13:2).

As this verse and many others indicate, gaining theological knowledge is important, but it is not the greatest good of Christian faith.
One of the most effective ways to avoid the destructive consequences of theological controversy is to delight in the doctrinal unity we share with all followers of Christ around the world. When we balance our concern for the details of theology with a proper concern for unity, doctrine can actually unite us rather than divide us.

The Church of Jesus Christ today is quite concerned about unity. We have so many denominations and different points of view on the Holy Spirit, on women, on baptism. Yet it seems that today in the twenty-first century we are more concerned about getting together on the basis of action, reaching the world, rather than on the basis of the truth. It is very interesting that our Lord Jesus and also the apostle Paul, when they think of unity — I’m thinking of the gospel of John 17 and Ephesians 4 — that they’re thinking about the unity that we have because of our one God, one Lord, one Spirit, one faith, one baptism. And so, it is the truths, or the body of truth that we believe in, that needs to be the foundation of our unity in Christ. 

—	Dr. Samuel Ling

Throughout the world there are hundreds of millions of true followers of Christ who stand firmly committed to the central biblical teachings expressed in the Apostles’ Creed. In fact, at this very moment countless Christians suffer persecution and even martyrdom for these commitments. They may disagree with us about a number of other theological issues. In fact, they may object strongly to viewpoints that you and I hold dear. But despite our differences, we stand together in what the creed says about God, the church, and salvation. Remember what Jesus prayed for the church in John 17:23:

May they be brought to complete unity to let the world know that you sent me and have loved them even as you have loved me (John 17:23).

Notice that Jesus said that unity in the church was proof that he had been sent by the Father. When we stand shoulder to shoulder with other followers of Christ, stressing what we have in common theologically, we testify to the world that the gospel is true, and this empowers our evangelism.

Having defined the gospel and having agreed on the common ground of the gospel, I think one way that we can pursue unity and truth is to say that we are so committed to that unity that we have in the gospel, that we are going to pursue unity with one another, in life and ministry, in such a way that we do not ask one another to relinquish our convictions of truth. But we in fact celebrate even those areas in which we differ from one another. We differ from one another respectfully. We differ from one another intelligently. We differ from one another lovingly. But we look for things in one another that we have mutual joy in, at the truth and convictional level. And we celebrate those things to a certain extent, so that the unity is enjoyed and so that we can have legitimate, conscientious differences in other areas of our theological convictions.

—	Dr. J. Ligon Duncan III

The Apostles’ Creed can help Christians everywhere to differentiate between essential beliefs and beliefs that are of secondary importance. As we stress this creed in our personal lives and in the corporate life of the church, we will find that theology doesn’t necessarily divide us from each other. Instead, we will find ourselves uniting with other faithful servants of Christ, and thereby fulfilling Jesus’ own vision for his church. 



CONCLUSION
	
In this lesson introducing the articles of faith of the Apostles’ Creed, we have spoken of the history of the creed in terms of its development and purpose. We have provided an overview of its doctrines in terms of God, the church, and salvation. And we have mentioned the importance of its articles of faith in terms of their foundational, universal, and unifying nature.
The Apostles’ Creed is an extremely important historical document that has summarized central Christian beliefs for hundreds and hundreds of years. Even today, it continues to offer a unified starting point for Christian theologians in every denomination. In the lessons that follow in this series, we will explore the articles of faith in the Apostles’ Creed in greater detail, looking at how they represent the truths of Scripture that unify Christian teaching throughout the world.

 
CONTRIBUTORS

Dr. Van Gayton (Host) is Academic Dean at The Williams Bible Institute and Seminary and has been a renowned Bible teacher and lecturer at a number of distinguished seminaries and universities throughout the world. Dr. Gayton also served as the Chaplain of the Federal Bureau of Prisons for four years and was on the Board of Directors for the Institute of Religion and Public Policy in Washington D.C. Dr. Gayton holds a Master of Theology from International Seminary, a Master of Divinity from Logos Bible College, a Doctor of Bible Philosophy from Christian Leadership University, a Doctor of Theology from Faith Theological Seminary, and a Doctor of Ministry from Reformed Theological Seminary. He was consecrated as a bishop in Apostolic Succession and served as Archbishop of the International Community of Christian Churches, a ministry committed to restoring the historical unity of the Body of Christ.


Dr. David R. Bauer is Dean of the School of Biblical Interpretation and the Ralph Waldo Beeson Professor of Inductive Biblical Studies at Asbury Theological Seminary.

Dr. Steve Blakemore is the Assistant Professor of Philosophy at Wesley Biblical Seminary.

Dr. Paul Chang is the Senior Pastor of Monmouth Chinese Christian Church in Middletown, New Jersey.

Dr. J. Ligon Duncan III is Chancellor and CEO of Reformed Theological Seminary and the John E. Richards Professor of Systematic and Historical Theology.

Dr. Steve Harper is the founding Vice President of the Florida-Dunnam campus of Asbury Theological Seminary in Orlando, FL, and retired Professor of Spiritual Formation and Wesley Studies.

Dr. Riad Kassis is International Director of the International Council for Evangelical Theological Education.

Dr. Samuel Ling is Co-founder of China Horizon.

Dr. Robert G. Lister is Associate Professor of Biblical and Theological Studies at the Talbot School of Theology.

Dr. R. Albert Mohler, Jr. is President of The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.

Dr. John Oswalt is the Visiting Distinguished Professor of Old Testament at Asbury Theological Seminary.

Dr. J. I. Packer (1926-2020) was Board of Governors’ Professor of Theology at Regent College in Vancouver, British Columbia and preached and lectured widely in Great Britain and America.

Dr. Jonathan T. Pennington is Associate Professor of New Testament Interpretation and the Director of Research Doctoral Studies at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.

Dr. K. Erik Thoennes is Professor of Biblical and Theological Studies at Biola University’s Talbot School of Theology and is Chair of the Biblical and Theological Studies Theology Department.

Dr. Peter Walker has served as Professor of Biblical Studies at Trinity School for Ministry and as Associate Vice-Principal at Wycliffe Hall, Oxford. He is currently an instructor with Jerusalem Center for Biblical Studies.

Dr. Stephen J. Wellum is Professor of Christian Theology at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary

