# Biblical Foundations – Module Four – The Old Testament Canon
# Discussion Questions 


1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	Describe a situation in which you might appropriate thematic analysis to gain guidance and insight for a personal concern?


3.	Have you ever found it difficult to believe the historical events of the Bible? Why should Christians believe the supernatural events of the Old Testament? 


4.	How does understanding the diachronic trace of biblical events enrich your understanding of Scripture? 


5.	Give an example of how knowing the writer’s intentions can help you understand Scripture better. 


6.	In literary analysis, how can you avoid the fallacies regarding the writer, the audience, and the document? 


7.	In what ways is the Bible like any other book? In what ways is it different? How should these similarities and differences affect the way you read it? 

8.	How would you describe the way you have used the Old Testament in the past? 

9.	What changes do you think you need to make in the way you study and apply the Old Testament?

10.	What is your attitude toward the authority and infallibility of the Old Testament?

 
REVIEW STATEMENT: In this lesson we looked at how the Old Testament canon presents specific guidance within God’s covenant, and how we may find it. The three main ways the teaching of the Old Testament comes to the people of God are (1) as a Mirror, (2) as a Window and (3) as a Picture. 

CASE STUDY: When Susan studied the Bible for her devotions, she almost always approached 
the passage looking for the author’s original intent. When she made applications to her
personal life, they were implications of the author’s intent, and not usually based on her own
questions. But more often than not she read the Bible in order to know the facts of the Bible.
Also, she rarely looked at how passages were connected to the person and work of Christ
unless she was reading the New Testament where Christ was specifically mentioned. 

## REFLECTION QUESTIONS:

1.	Examine your devotional life. Do you tend to rely more on one of these ways of understanding the Old Testament than on others? Discuss this with a trusted friend and in your learning community.
2.	What would be some of the possible dangers of over-relying on the Old Testament canon as Mirror?
3.	 What would be some of the possible dangers of over-relying on the Old Testament canon as Window?
4.	What would be some of the possible dangers of over-relying on the Old Testament canon as Picture?
5.	If you do find yourself falling into any of these dangers:
a.	How might this tendency be partly a result of your giftedness?
b.	 How might it be encouraged by the characteristics and expectations of your congregation?
c.	How might it be partly a result of the characteristics of your culture?
Action Assignments:

•	If you see yourself falling into any of these dangers, write down some ideas about how to overcome this tendency. 
•	Make a list of questions you would ask yourself as you read Scripture — a list that might help you avoid these dangers. 
•	Discuss these ideas with a trusted friend or with your learning community.
