## ORIGINAL MEANING
We have already seen that on a large scale Moses’ primeval history was intended to validate Israel’s exodus and conquest by showing how they were in accordance with the order God had established in the early history of the world. But how did this general purpose show itself in the particular account of 1:1–2:3? How did Moses connect his ministry to Israel with the creation story?
We will explore how Moses did this by looking once again at the three main parts of Genesis 1:1–2:3. First, we will look at the dark chaotic world. Then we will move to the last section of the ideally ordered world. And finally, we will return to the middle portion of the passage where God ordered the world. Let’s look first at 1:1-2, the dark chaotic world.

### DARK CHAOTIC WORLD
For our purposes, the most important feature of the first two verses of Genesis is the dramatic tension introduced in verse 2. The manner in which Moses described the dramatic tension between the chaotic world and the Holy Spirit made it clear that he was not only writing about creation, but was also writing about Israel’s exodus.
On the one hand, you will recall that in Genesis 1:2 Moses described the earth as “formless,” or tōhû. On the other hand, he described the Spirit of God as “hovering,” or in Hebrew, merachefet.
The significance of this scene becomes clear when we look at a passage in which Moses alluded to this dramatic portrait from Genesis. In Deuteronomy 32:10-12 Moses used the terminology of Genesis 1:2 to draw special attention to the connection between Israel’s exodus and the creation account. Listen to what he says in these verses:

> In a desert land [the Lord] found him, in a barren and howling waste. He shielded him and cared for him; he guarded him as the apple of his eye, like an eagle that stirs up its nest and hovers over its young, that spreads its wings to catch them and carries them on its pinions. The Lord alone led him; no foreign god was with him (Deuteronomy 32:10-12).

These verses are important because they are the only other place where Moses used the terms “formless” and “hovering” in all of his writings.
In verse 10, the term here translated “barren” is the Hebrew word tōhû, which appears in Genesis 1:2 as “formless.” Also, in verse 11, the term translated “hovers” is merachefet, the term used in Genesis 1:2 when the Spirit of God “hovers” over the deep.
Moses put these two terms together in Deuteronomy 32 in order to connect it solidly with Genesis 1. But just how did the use of these terms draw this connection? What did the terms “barren” and “hover” mean in Deuteronomy 32?
In the first place, Moses applied the term “barren” to Egypt. In 32:10 we read these words:

>  In a desert land [the Lord] found him, in a barren and howling waste (Deuteronomy 32:10).

In the second place, Moses used the term “hover” for God’s presence with Israel, probably the pillar of smoke and fire, as he led the nation toward the Promised Land. In 32:10-11 we read these words

> He guarded him as the apple of his eye, like an eagle that stirs up its nest and hovers over its young (Deuteronomy 32:10-11).

In many respects, we may treat Deuteronomy 32:10-12 as Moses’ commentary on his own work in Genesis 1:2. It gives us insight into his intention as he wrote the first chapter of Genesis.
Deuteronomy 32 helps us understand that Moses saw a parallel situation between the creation and Israel’s deliverance from Egypt. Moses wrote that both creation and Israel’s deliverance from Egypt involved chaotic, uninhabitable worlds. He also wrote that God moved into the original chaotic world by hovering, much as he hovered over Israel when he delivered them from Egypt.
From these parallels between creation and the Exodus, we can see that Moses wrote about the dark chaotic world not simply to tell Israel about the creation; he also presented God’s work at creation as a prototype, a pattern, or a paradigm, which explained what God was doing for the nation of Israel in his day. When Moses wrote about God’s original work in creation, he did so to show his readers that they had not made a mistake in following him out of Egypt. Instead, the creation account proved how their deliverance from Egypt was a mighty act of God. God was re-ordering the world by delivering Israel from the chaos of Egypt, like he did in the beginning. God now hovered over Israel like he hovered over the creation in the beginning. Rather than being a mistake, the Exodus from Egypt was God at work bringing his desired order back to the world. In a word, Israel’s deliverance from Egypt was nothing less than a re-creation.
With this parallel between the beginning of Genesis chapter 1 and Israel’s exodus experience in mind, we can see this perspective confirmed as we look at the final portion, the ideally ordered world in 2:1-3.

> Remember the Sabbath day by keeping it holy... For in six days the Lord made the heavens and the earth, the sea, and all that is in them, but he rested on the seventh day (Exodus 20:8-11).

When Israel heard in Genesis that God rested on the seventh day, they could not help but relate the Genesis account to their own Sabbath observances and to the Ten Commandments.
Although the Israelites kept Sabbath in some measure in the wilderness, it is important to realize that the full extent of Sabbath worship could only take place in the Promised Land. The Israelites were to keep a weekly Sabbath, as we find in Exodus 20:8- 11. But they were also to keep other holy days or Sabbaths. For instance, we learn from Leviticus 25 that they were also to observe every seventh year as a Sabbath year by leaving the ground fallow. Israel was also to keep the great year of Jubilee every fiftieth year when all debts were forgiven and all the families were to return to their original land inheritances. In Moses’ law, the full worship of God in Sabbath observance was much more complex than anything the Israelites observed as they wandered through the wilderness.
Because the full observance of Sabbath could only take place as Israel entered the land, Moses often spoke of Canaan as a land of “rest,” or the “resting place,” using the Hebrew terms nuach (נוּ ַח) or menucha (מנֻ ָחה), which are often closely associated with shabbat (Sabbath). In a number of places, Moses described the Promised Land as Israel’s resting place where the nation would finally observe worship as God’s law required. For instance, in Deuteronomy 12:10-11 we read these words:

> But you will cross the Jordan and settle in the land the Lord your God is giving you as an inheritance, and he will give you rest from all your enemies around you so that you will live in safety. Then to the place the Lord your God will choose as a dwelling for his Name — there you are to bring everything I command you: your burnt offerings and sacrifices, your tithes and special gifts, and all the choice possessions you have vowed to the Lord (Deuteronomy 12:10-11).

We see in this passage that the full observance of Sabbath — the worship of God — would take place only after Israel had entered the land of rest.
For Moses, Sabbath stood for more than individuals and families setting apart a day for quiet worship. Sabbath was a central dimension of Moses’ vision of dwelling in the land of rest, worshipping and celebrating at the special place where God would place his Name. This is why in Psalm 95:11 God spoke of those who were forbidden to enter the land of Canaan in this way:

> So I declared on oath in my anger, “They shall never enter my rest” (Psalm 95:11).

This close connection between Sabbath and the full national worship of God in the Promised Land explains why Moses ended his account of creation with God entering his Sabbath rest. Moses was explaining to the Israelites that just as God had moved the earth from chaos to Sabbath, he was moving Israel from the chaos of Egypt to the goal of Sabbath in the Land of Promise. Moses was leading Israel to the place of rest, the land of Canaan. And those who resisted Moses’ program were not merely resisting a human plan. They were actually resisting God’s efforts to bring his people into conformity with the ideal structures of the universe. Leaving Egypt and entering the Land of Promise was nothing less than lining up with God’s perfect plan for the creation. Now that we have seen how the chaotic beginning and Sabbath end of the creation story explained the true nature of what God was doing for Israel through Moses, we should look briefly at some of the elements of the middle portion of the days of ordering in Genesis 1:3-31. How did Moses link the days of creation to his ministry?

