### SIX DAYS OF ORDERING

There are many links between the days of creation and Israel’s exodus, but we will look at only two of these: first, the connections with the deliverance from Egypt, and second, the goal of possessing the Promised Land.

#### Deliverance from Egypt

In the first place, in delivering Israel from Egypt, God displayed the same kind of power he demonstrated in the ordering of creation in Genesis 1. On one side of the picture, God reversed the order established at creation by sending plagues on the Egyptians. For example, rather than waters teeming with life as in the beginning, the waters of Egypt became deadly and the fish died when God turned the water into blood. Rather than humans having dominion over the living things as God ordained in the beginning, frogs, gnats, insects and locusts ruled over the Egyptians. The separation of light and darkness at creation was overturned as darkness covered the land of Egypt even during the daytime. And rather than the ground bringing forth vegetation, hail, fire and locusts destroyed all the crops in Egypt. Rather than being fruitful and multiplying, both Egyptian animals and people died in large numbers. In these and many other ways, the curses on Egypt reversed the order God had established in the six days of Genesis 1. During the time of the plagues, the land of Egypt truly regressed toward the primordial chaos. It is no wonder then that Moses summoned Israel to leave that place, calling it a formless, barren wasteland.
Any Israelite who believed that life was good in Egypt had to reckon with Moses’ creation account. Their experience in Egypt stood in stark contrast to the way the Egyptians themselves thought about their land. The Egyptians believed it was a land blessed by the gods, and apparently at least some Israelites had believed this as well. But Moses made it clear that Egypt had become the opposite of God’s ideally ordered world.
While this contrast with Egypt is plain enough, the six days of creation also had a positive correspondence to the deliverance from Egypt. While the Egyptians saw their land regress into the primordial chaos, the Israelites saw God ordering the world in their favor in ways that resembled the six days of creation. Their waters remained fresh and life-giving. They were not overrun by frogs and locusts. They enjoyed light while the Egyptians suffered in darkness. Israelite fields remained productive. Their animals were protected, and the Israelites multiplied while they were in Egypt.
And more than this, in an astounding, dramatic display of his control over creation, God held back the Red Sea and caused dry land to appear before the Israelites, just as it had appeared on the third day of creation. The natural wonders God performed on Israel’s behalf were not unprecedented. In many ways, they recalled the ways God ordered the world in the days of Genesis 1.
These correspondences between the way God ordered the earth in Genesis 1 and the way he delivered Israel from Egypt demonstrated to Moses’ readers that God’s work on their behalf paralleled his work of creation. In their exodus from Egypt, God reshaped the world as he had in the beginning.
Not only did the deliverance from Egypt recall the days of creation, but the order which God established in the beginning also anticipated the way life would be in the land of Canaan.

#### Possession of Canaan

When Israel reached the Land of Promise, nature would be properly ordered with fertility and joy. This is why God called Canaan a land flowing with milk and honey. In addition to this, in the Promised Land, the Israelites would take the proper place of the image of God as it was established in the sixth day.
Notice especially that in Genesis 1:28, God told the human race:

> Be fruitful and increase in number; fill the earth and subdue it. Rule over the fish of the sea and the birds of the air and over every living creature that moves on the ground (Genesis 1:28).

Although Israel had experienced some of this blessing, even in Egypt, it was in the land of Canaan that God would afford Israel this honor in even greater measure. Under Moses’ leadership, the Israelites were on their way to the place where they would fulfill this ideal position in the creation. Listen to what God promised would happen to the faithful Israelites in the land of Israel in Leviticus 26:9:

> I will look on you with favor and make you fruitful and increase your numbers, and I will keep my covenant with you (Leviticus 26:9).

Here the allusion to Genesis 1:28 is obvious. God said in Genesis 1:28, “Be fruitful and increase in number.” In Leviticus 26:9 he said that he would make them fruitful and increase their numbers in the land.
The land of Canaan would be like the wonderful world God ordered in the beginning. Canaan would be a place of natural harmony where the image of God would be able to fulfill its original role in the earth.
We have touched only on a few of the ways the six days of creation connect to Israel’s experience in the days of Moses. But we see from this sampling that Moses’ record of how God ordered the universe in the first six days was not simply a report of what had happened at the beginning of time. He described the six days of creation in ways that helped his Israelite readers to see clearly what was happening in their own lives. Just as God had moved the cosmos from chaos to Sabbath by ordering nature in certain ways, God was taking Israel from the chaos of Egypt to Sabbath rest in Canaan by re-ordering the world on their behalf.
We can only imagine the reaction of the Israelites when they heard Moses tell them about the creation of the world. They would have realized what was happening to them was no accident. By redeeming them from Egypt and taking them to Canaan, God was moving in the world as he had done in the beginning to bring an ideal order to the universe. Israel’s salvation was a re-creation, and they were to follow Moses into greater and greater experiences of that re-creation.
Now that we have seen the original meaning of Genesis 1:1–2:3, we should move to our final topic, the modern application of the creation account. In applying this text, we will closely follow the ways the New Testament elaborated on the themes of this passage.

## MODERN APPLICATION
The writers of the New Testament relied heavily on Genesis 1 to tell them about God’s creation of the world. They gave every indication that they believed in the reliability of Moses’ account. Yet, as important as this fact may be, the New Testament writers also elaborated on Moses’ central purpose as we have outlined it here in this lesson.
Just as Moses saw creation as a prototype of Israel’s redemption from Egypt, the New Testament looks at Genesis 1:1–2:3 as a prototype of a much greater redemption — the salvation that comes in Christ. The New Testament teaches that all the experiences of salvation and judgment which Israel saw in the days of the Old Testament anticipated the great and final day when God would bring salvation and judgment through his son, Jesus. This belief led New Testament writers to approach Moses’ account of creation with a special focus on Christ. Just as Israel was to see her own exodus in the light of creation, New Testament writers looked at Christ in the light of creation.
Whenever we explore the New Testament’s teaching on the redemptive work of Christ, we must always remember that New Testament writers realized that Christ did not bring redemption to the world all at once. Instead, they believed that Christ brought great salvation and judgment to the world in three interconnected stages of his kingdom.
In the first place, Christ accomplished much for the salvation of his people when he first came to earth. We may call this period of Christ’s first coming, the inauguration of the kingdom. The New Testament looks to Christ’s life, death, resurrection, and ascension, as well as to Pentecost and the foundational ministries of the apostles, as the beginning of Christ’s great redemption.
In the second place, the New Testament writers understood that Christ’s kingdom continues now that he has left this earth. During this time, God’s saving grace spreads over the world through the preaching of the gospel. The whole history of the church after the apostles and until the return of Christ comprises the continuation of salvation in Christ.
In the third place, the New Testament teaches that salvation will come in its fullness at the consummation of the kingdom, when Christ returns in glory. We will see his victory over wickedness, the dead in Christ will rise, and we will reign with him over the world. The salvation begun at Christ’s first coming and continuing today will be completed when he returns at the consummation.
These three stages of Christ’s kingdom are so essential for understanding the ways New Testament writers elaborated on Moses’ creation that we should look at each of them separately. Following the example of Moses writing to Israel, New Testament writers applied the creation account of Genesis to Christ’s salvation in the inauguration, continuation, and consummation of Christ’s kingdom. Let’s look first at the ways the New Testament relates the first chapter of Genesis to the inauguration of the kingdom.

### INAUGURATION
How does the New Testament use creation as a lens for interpreting the inauguration of Christ’s kingdom? Well, on several occasions the New Testament speaks of the first coming of Christ as God’s re-creation, his reshaping of the cosmos. Consider first the opening words of the gospel of John. In John 1:1-3 we read these words:

> In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. He was with God in the beginning. Through him all things were made; without him nothing was made that has been made (John 1:1-3).

Notice that John’s gospel starts off, “In the beginning.” We all realize that these words come from the opening words of Genesis 1:1 where Moses wrote:

> In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth (Genesis 1:1).

From the outset, John put his readers in the framework of the creation account in Genesis. Then John went on to say that Christ was the person of the Trinity who made all things; he was the Word of God, spoken at creation, by whom the world was first made.
Although these verses begin with a clear reference to the creation story, as we continue to read in John 1, we find that John subtly shifted from Genesis to another set of events that paralleled the creation account. Listen to what he wrote in the next verses, in John 1:4-5:

> In him was life, and that life was the light of men. The light shines in the darkness, but the darkness has not understood it (John 1:4-5).

At this point John continued to draw upon the themes of Genesis 1, especially the theme of the light which God brought to the dark chaotic world on the first day. Yet, instead of simply speaking of Jesus as the light of Genesis, John pointed to the incarnation of Christ as the light shining into the darkness of the world caused by sin. By shifting from creation to the coming of Christ, John revealed that in Christ’s shining against the sinful darkness of the world, God moved against the chaos of the world, just as he had done in the beginning.
A similar motif appears in 2 Corinthians 4:6. There Paul explained the glory of his ministry in this way:

> For God, who said, “Let light shine out of darkness,” made his light shine in our hearts to give us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ (2 Corinthians 4:6).

Here Paul directly referred to Genesis 1 in the words, “God ... said ‘Let light shine out of darkness.’” He focused first on the original ordering of creation with the appearance of light, but then drew attention to an important parallel to the creation story — God also “made his light shine in our hearts” when “the glory of God” was seen “in the face of Christ.”
The apostle said that the inauguration of Christ’s kingdom — that time when Christ’s face could be seen on earth — was best understood when it was related to the prototype of God’s original creative work. The same glory God displayed in the appearance of light in the beginning was also revealed at Christ’s first coming into the world of darkness.
From these two passages we find an essential element in the Christian approach to Moses’ creation account. Followers of Christ find in Genesis 1 a portrait, an anticipation, of what God did in the first coming of Christ, the inauguration of the kingdom.
In many ways, you and I face the kind of temptation that the Israelites following Moses faced. God did something wonderful when Christ first came to this world, just as he did when he first delivered Israel from Egypt. Yet, we often fail to see how magnificent God’s work in Christ 2,000 years ago actually was. From an uninformed human vantage point, Christ’s life does not look very important. It can easily be brushed off as just one of many insignificant events that occurred in those times. When we are tempted to think this way about Christ, we must remember the outlook of the New Testament. Christ’s appearance on earth was the beginning of God’s final re-ordering of the world. God was delivering the world from the chaotic darkness of sin and death. Jesus’ first coming began the process by which God would make his creation a wonderful, eternally life-giving place for him and his image to dwell in glory forever. We are right to place our faith in Christ, and in him alone.
So far, we have seen that the New Testament uses the creation story to explain the significance of Christ’s first coming. Now we may see that the New Testament considers the continuation of the kingdom, the period between the first and second comings of Christ, to be a re-creation as well.

### CONTINUATION
One familiar passage which illustrates this outlook is 2 Corinthians 5:17:

> Therefore, if anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation; the old has gone, the new has come! (2 Corinthians 5:17).

The King James Version translates this verse to say that when a person is in Christ he becomes “a new creature.” This translation is unfortunate because it fails to convey Paul’s allusion to the creation account of Genesis 1. The Greek expression is ktisis (κτίσις), which is properly translated “creation” (as in most modern translations), not “creature.” In fact, this portion of the passage may actually be translated, “There is a new creation.” Paul’s concept seems to be that when people come to Christ in saving faith, they become part of a new realm, a new world, a new creation.
In this light we see that during the continuation of the kingdom men and women experience the new creation when they place their faith in Christ. In this sense, the Genesis account of creation becomes a way of understanding properly what happens to everyone who hears, believes, and follows Christ. As we become part of God’s new creation, we begin to enjoy the wonder of God’s ideal order for the world.
For this reason, it is not surprising that Paul also described the process of an individual’s salvation in another way that drew upon Moses’ creation account. In Colossians 3:9-10 we read these words:

>  You have taken off your old self with its practices and have put on the new self, which is being renewed in knowledge in the image of its Creator (Colossians 3:9-10).

In this passage, the apostle described what happens to the followers of Christ in terms of Genesis 1. We are “renewed ... in the image of [our] Creator.” Of course, Paul referred to Genesis 1:27 where Moses said that God’s ideal world included Adam and Eve who were created “in the image of God.” During the continuation of the kingdom of Christ, we find that we are constantly “being renewed” in a lifelong process of regaining the status that our first parents held as God’s images.
These two passages demonstrate that the New Testament used Moses’ creation account as a standard for understanding Christ’s work, not only in the inauguration of the kingdom, but also in its continuation.
Of course, the New Testament writers took the themes of Moses’ creation story to one final step. Not only did they look at Christ’s first coming as the beginning of a new creation, and to the continuation of the kingdom as a time when individual people enjoy the effects of the new creation in their lives, but they also applied Creation themes to the final stage of Christ’s work — the consummation of the kingdom.

### CONSUMMATION
At least two passages in the New Testament stand out in this regard. First, Hebrews 4 refers to Christ’s return in terms of Moses’ creation account:

> For somewhere he has spoken about the seventh day in these words: “And on the seventh day God rested from all his work.”... There remains, then, a Sabbath-rest for the people of God; for anyone who enters God’s rest also rests from his own work, just as God did from  his. Let us, therefore, make every effort to enter that rest (Hebrews 4:4-11).

Just as Moses used God’s Sabbath day in Genesis 2 to spur Israel toward Canaan, the land of rest, the writer of Hebrews saw God’s Sabbath day as an ideal prototype of the ultimate redemption we will experience when Christ returns. In the same way that God ideally ordered the world in the beginning and brought about Sabbath joy, when Christ returns in glory, he will re-order the world and give his people the joy of the final Sabbath rest. As we long for this day, we are told here that we must “make every effort to enter that rest,” which will come when Christ returns.
Finally, one of the most magnificent passages that identifies Christ’s second coming in terms of Moses’ creation account is Revelation 21:1. Listen to the way John applied creation themes to the return of Christ:

>  Then I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away, and there was no longer any sea (Revelation 21:1).

John spoke of “a new heaven and a new earth,” and this phrase recalls Genesis 1:1 which records that God created “the heavens and the earth.” Moreover, John said that in this new world there would “no longer [be] any sea.” You will recall that in Genesis 1:9 God restrained the sea, keeping it within boundaries so that dry land could appear and form a safe habitat for the human race. In the new world, after Christ’s return, we’ll find that the salt seas will be entirely removed from the earth and replaced with fresh life- giving water. The work of Christ is similar to the days of creation in Genesis 1, but in Christ God will go further, much further in bringing the ideal order to completion. The entire universe will be re-created into new heavens and a new earth, and God and his people will enjoy that new world together.
Unfortunately, Christians often disconnect their eternal hope from the creation. We assume that we will spend eternity in the spiritual world up in heaven. But the New Testament is very clear about this. Our final destiny is a return to the Sabbath ordained in the seventh day of creation. We will spend eternity in the new heavens and new earth. This was the hope of Israel in the days of Moses, and it is our hope even today.
When we follow the guidance of the New Testament, we should approach the opening chapter of Genesis as more than a mere record of what happened long ago. It is also a portrait of what God has done in Christ’s first coming, what he is doing now in our lives day by day, and what God will one day bring to completion when Christ returns.
In all three stages of Christ’s kingdom, God moves against the chaos of sin and death in the world, and in our lives. In the inauguration, continuation, and consummation of the kingdom, he sets the world on a path to its ideal end — a wonderful new creation for his people.

## CONCLUSION
In this lesson we have seen four main ideas: the overarching purpose of Genesis 1–11, the structure and original meaning of Genesis 1:1–2:3, and the ways the New Testament applies the themes of the creation account to Christ and to our lives. The implications of this approach to Moses’ creation record for today are astounding, to say the least.
As Christians living today, we need to see how Moses’ original purpose in Genesis applies to our lives in Christ. Just like the Israelites who first heard the opening chapters of Genesis, we are easily discouraged as we follow Christ in this sinful world. But as Moses encouraged his readers to believe that they were on God’s way toward his ideal world, we should also be encouraged as we walk God’s amazing path toward this ideal world in Christ.

Dr. Richard L. Pratt, Jr. (Host) is Co-Founder and President of Third Millennium Ministries. He served as Professor of Old Testament at Reformed Theological Seminary for more than 20 years and was chair of the Old Testament department. An ordained minister, Dr. Pratt travels extensively to evangelize and teach. He studied at Westminster Theological Seminary, received his M.Div. from Union Theological Seminary, and earned his Th.D. in Old Testament Studies from Harvard University. Dr. Pratt is the general editor of the NIV Spirit of the Reformation Study Bible and a translator for the New Living Translation. He has also authored numerous articles and books, including Pray with Your Eyes Open, Every Thought Captive, Designed for Dignity, He Gave Us Stories, Commentary on 1 & 2 Chronicles and Commentary on 1 & 2 Corinthians.
