## HOLY SPIRIT

The book of Acts presents a rich theology of the Holy Spirit. It describes him as the one that empowers the church to live transformed lives and to evangelize the world. It records that he performed many signs and wonders to validate the ministry of the apostles and other early church leaders. It testifies that he gave great courage to Christians who faced opposition and persecution. In short, Acts describes the Holy Spirit as the one whose power enables the spread of the gospel and the kingdom, and as the one who empowers his people for godly living. 
While the Spirit worked in a variety of ways in Acts, we will focus on his influence over the church in three periods of time. First, we will look at the Spirit in Acts before Pentecost. Second, we will examine the outpouring of the Spirit in Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost. And third, we will investigate the work of the Spirit after Pentecost. Let’s look first at how the book of Acts describes the Spirit before Pentecost. 


### BEFORE PENTECOST

In Acts 1:3-11, Luke recorded that Jesus spent forty days between his resurrection and ascension, teaching his apostles. As we read in Acts 1:3:

> [Jesus] appeared to them over a period of forty days and spoke about the kingdom of God (Acts 1:3).

As we will see, one critical element in Jesus’ teaching about the kingdom was that the Holy Spirit would soon come in a particular way to the apostles. 
We will touch on two aspects of Jesus’ teaching about the Holy Spirit before Pentecost. First, we will look at the timing of the Holy Spirit’s coming. And second, we will focus on the purpose of his coming. Let’s first consider Jesus’ teaching on the timing of the Holy Spirit’s arrival. 


#### Timing

Listen to Jesus’ words in Acts 1:4-8:

> “Do not leave Jerusalem, but wait for the gift my Father promised ... in a few days you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit.” [The apostles] asked him, “Lord, are you at this time going to restore the kingdom to Israel?” He said to them: “It is not for you to know the times or dates the Father has set by his own authority. But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes on you; and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria and to the ends of the earth” (Acts 1:4-8).

Notice that when Jesus announced the coming baptism of the Spirit, the apostles asked if Jesus was about to restore the kingdom to Israel. The expression restore the kingdom to Israel is unfamiliar to many modern readers, so we should pause to explain it. 
The Old Testament prophets predicted that because Israel and Judah’s sins were so great, God would exile them from the Promised Land and subject them to the tyranny of foreign rulers. Based on Old Testament prophecies, Jews believed that God would later send the Messiah to restore his people by forgiving their sins, returning them to the Land, and ruling over them. As a descendant of David, the Messiah would become king over Israel and Judah, turning the Promised Land into the center of God’s kingdom on earth, where God’s people would enjoy eternal and blessed life. By the first century, Israel had suffered judgment for hundreds of years, and desperately longed for a political Messiah to restore the kingdom of Israel. So, when the apostles learned that Jesus was about to ascend into heaven, they hoped that he would fulfill these Old Testament predictions before he left. This is why they asked him about the restoration of the kingdom to Israel. However, Jesus taught that this popular expectation of a sudden political restoration of the kingdom to Israel was misguided and that the spread of the gospel throughout the world and Christ’s glorious return would be the way God fulfilled Old Testament prophecy. 
But why did the apostles ask about the restoration of the kingdom in response to Jesus’ statements about the baptism of the Holy Spirit? Well, once again, the apostles were thinking about Old Testament prophecy. In a number of passages, the Old Testament prophets predicted that when judgment was over, God would pour out his Spirit as never before. Listen to what the prophet Isaiah said about the Spirit in Isaiah 44:3-4:

> I will pour water on the thirsty land, and streams on the dry ground; I will pour out my Spirit on your offspring, and my blessing on your descendants. They will spring up like grass in a meadow, like poplar trees by flowing streams (Isaiah 44:3-4).

Here Isaiah spoke about restoration, saying that God would pour out his Spirit on the land. 
Old Testament prophets proclaimed that before the Messiah came, Israel would live in what the rabbi’s called this age of sin, corruption and death. And they announced that when the Messiah came, he would usher in a new age, what the rabbi’s called the age to come, the age in which God’s enemies would be judged, and his people ultimately and irrevocably blessed. Old Testament prophets never spelled out how long this process would take, but most rabbis expected it to happen all at once. 
In contrast to this view, Jesus explained that God’s kingdom would unfold over time by spreading throughout the nations. Instead of coming all at once, the transition to the glorious kingdom of God would come in stages. The age to come would be inaugurated during Jesus’ earthly ministry. It would continue during Christ’s reign in heaven, as the kingdom spread through the ministry of the gospel. And when Jesus returned in the future, this age of sin would completely end, and the universal, messianic kingdom would reach its consummation. 
This outlook on the coming of the kingdom explains why Jesus responded to the apostles as he did. The Holy Spirit was about to be poured out on the church, but this did not mean that the consummation of all things was near. Jesus had only inaugurated the kingdom, and the blessing of the Spirit would equip his church as it continued to live in a sinful world prior to his return. With the timing of the Holy Spirit’s coming in mind, we should turn to the purpose of his coming. 


#### Purpose

Listen again to Jesus’ words to the apostles in Acts 1:8: 

> You will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes on you; and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria and to the ends of the earth (Acts 1:8).

In these words, Jesus redirected the apostles to think about the baptism of the Spirit in new ways. Rather than ushering in the final state of the kingdom, the Spirit was to be poured out to empower the apostles to be Christ’s godly and faithful witnesses. Let’s unpack what Jesus said by focusing on two dimensions of the Spirit’s ministry: power and godly witnesses.
First, Jesus said that the disciples would receive power through the baptism of the Spirit. The association of the Spirit with power was common in the Old Testament, often being represented by the expression “Spirit of God,” which translates the Hebrew phrase ruach elohim. This Hebrew expression referred to a powerful wind or force of energy from God. In the Old Testament, God’s Spirit worked powerfully in the world at large to bring God’s will to pass. 
The Holy Spirit’s power was also manifested in dramatic ways in people’s lives. For instance, when the Spirit of God came upon Samson in Judges 14–15, Samson performed miraculous physical feats that brought Israel great victories over the Philistines. 
In addition to the Spirit’s power, Jesus mentioned that the Spirit would cause the disciples to be godly witnesses. This association also reflects the Old Testament. On a number of occasions, the Spirit of God gave his people power to speak boldly and effectively on God’s behalf. For example, listen to the words of Micah 3:8:

> But as for me, I am filled with power, with the Spirit of the Lord (Micah 3:8).

In this passage, Micah explained that the Spirit had emboldened him to speak the truth even though he was opposed by false prophets. 
So, when Jesus told his apostles that he would baptize them with the Holy Spirit to empower them as his witnesses, he indicated that the Spirit would act in them as he had acted through others in the Old Testament. The Holy Spirit would also perform acts of power to authenticate the truth of the apostles’ message, and he would give them words to speak to those who opposed them. And of course, these demonstrations of the Spirit appear over and over in the book of Acts. 
Now that we have seen some of the ways Luke introduced the Holy Spirit before Pentecost, we should turn to the outpouring of the Spirit on the day of Pentecost as the church was gathered in Jerusalem. 
