## APOSTLES

Having considered the role of the Holy Spirit, we are now ready to address our second topic: the apostles. Before Christ ascended into heaven, he appointed the apostles to continue his ministry, to extend his kingdom from Jerusalem to the very ends of the earth through the gospel. Earlier in this lesson we saw that Acts 1:8 describes the vital role that the Holy Spirit played in the early church. Listen again to Jesus’ words to his apostles:

> You will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes on you; and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria and to the ends of the earth (Acts 1:8).

At this point in our lesson, we want to focus on a second issue that stands out in this verse: the role of the apostles. As Jesus put it here, the Holy Spirit was given to the apostles so that they would become his witnesses throughout the world. 
In the early church, those who testified to the gospel in adverse circumstances came to be known as “martyrs” or “witnesses.” In the most extreme cases, witnesses were tortured or even killed for their witness to Christ. In fact, church tradition tells us that most of the apostles died in this way. This theme of witnessing for Christ in the face of opposition was a prominent concern for Luke as he wrote about the early church. And in this regard, no one surpassed the apostles as courageous, effective witnesses for Christ. 
We will focus on three dimensions of the apostles’ role as witnesses to Christ. First, we will note that their witness was unique. Second, we will see that it was authoritative. And third, we will look at the varied nature of their witness, the way they used different means to present the gospel message. Let’s begin with the unique qualifications of the apostles for their office.


### UNIQUE

The apostles were unique for at least two reasons. To begin with, the requirements for their office excluded anyone else from being called as an apostle.


#### Requirements

We all know that one of Jesus’ original twelve apostles, namely Judas Iscariot, betrayed our Lord to those who crucified him. Later, Judas took his own life, leaving only eleven apostles. Then, after Jesus had ascended to heaven, one of the first priorities of the eleven was to choose a twelfth apostle to replace Judas.
In Acts 1:21-26, Peter described the requirements for the new apostle in this way:

> “It is necessary to choose one of the men who have been with us the whole time the Lord Jesus went in and out among us ... For one of these must become a witness with us of his resurrection.” So they proposed two men ... Then they prayed, “Lord ... [s]how us which of these two you have chosen to take over this apostolic ministry” ... Then they cast lots, and the lot fell to Matthias (Acts 1:21-26).

These verses establish requirements for the office of apostle, all of which were unique to the apostles listed in Scripture. First, they had to have been taught directly by Jesus. Second, they had to have seen Jesus after his resurrection. And third, they had to have been appointed to their office by God himself. The eleven apostles met these requirements because they were taught by Jesus during his earthly ministry, they saw him after his resurrection, and they had all been appointed by Jesus himself. 
Matthias met these requirements because he was also taught by Jesus during the Lord’s earthly ministry, he saw the risen Lord, and he was chosen directly by God through the casting of lots.
After Matthias, only one other man in Scripture was appointed to the office of apostle: Paul. Paul was chosen as an apostle after Jesus had ascended into heaven, so the church was originally skeptical about his appointment. But Scripture teaches us that he did in fact see and learn from Jesus after his resurrection, and that he had been appointed by Jesus himself.
For example, Paul witnessed the risen Lord on the road to Damascus, as Luke records in Acts 9:3-6. Also, he was appointed to his office by God himself, as we read in Acts 9:15, and 22:12-16. In fact, Luke recounted Paul’s appointment three times to establish his claim as a true apostle in Acts 9, 22 and 26.
But even Paul admitted that his qualifications were somewhat unusual, since he had not come to faith until after Jesus’ ascension. Paul mentioned his unique and particular apostleship in 1 Corinthians 15:8-9:

> Last of all he appeared to me also, as to one abnormally born. For I am the least of the apostles (1 Corinthians 15:8-9).


#### Foundational Time

Besides meeting these unique requirements, the apostles were unique because they served at the foundational time in the life of the church. In this special time, they were appointed to the task of establishing the church of Jesus Christ. And because they did their job, and because the church has stood firm on their foundation, there has never again been a need for their special work.
Luke noted many ways that the apostles served as the foundation of the church. As we have seen in a prior lesson, the apostles were the primary witnesses who carried the gospel from Jerusalem, to Judea and Samaria, to the ends of the earth. Through their evangelism, the first Christian converts were gained from Judaism, from the corrupted worship of the Samaritans, and from Gentile paganism. Through their leadership, the first churches in history were established, and in them the patterns the church would follow. In these and many other ways, the apostles did unique work at a unique point in time. These times will never come again, and this work will never need to be completed again.
In Ephesians 2:19-20, Paul summarized the unique foundational role of the apostles in this way:

> God's household [is] built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, with Christ Jesus himself as the chief cornerstone (Ephesians 2:19-20).

There can never be another cornerstone, another Jesus. And in the same way, there can never be another foundation, another set of apostles and prophets who serve as the foundation for the church.
Unfortunately, in our day there are still churches who claim to have such authoritative apostles ministering among them. Yet, Luke made it clear that the original apostles were uniquely qualified for the requirements of their office, and they served at a uniquely foundational time that can never be repeated. We still have the witness of the apostles collected in the writings of the New Testament, but we should not expect this kind of apostle in the church today.


### AUTHORITATIVE

Having seen that the apostles witnessed to Christ in a unique way, we are ready to look at the authoritative nature of their witness. The apostles’ authority is seen in many ways throughout Acts, but for the sake of simplicity we will focus on just four of these. First, the apostles’ authority can be seen in the function of their office. Second, it is shown in God’s blessings on their ministry. Third, it is evident by their power to perform miracles. And fourth, it is apparent from the revelation they continued to receive. Let’s look first at the way the function of their office demonstrates their authority. 


#### Function

The word “apostle,” or apostolos in Greek, basically means one who is sent. It was commonly used to refer to messengers, to agents sent to accomplish missions, and to ambassadors who were authorized to speak on behalf of those who sent them. For example, when Jesus appointed seventy-two missionaries to preach about the kingdom of God in Luke 10, these were temporary ambassadors, appointed to bear a portion of Christ’s authority for a time. In Luke 10:16, Jesus commissioned the missionaries with these words:

> He who listens to you listens to me; he who rejects you rejects me; but he who rejects me rejects him who sent me (Luke 10:16).

Here we see that the missionaries were to be treated as surrogates for Christ. Those who received the missionaries were counted as receiving Christ, and those who received Christ were counted as receiving the one who sent him, namely, the Father. 
Beyond this, listen to the discussion that took place when the missionaries returned in Luke 10:17-19:

> The seventy-two returned with joy and said, “Lord, even the demons submit to us in your name.” He replied, “I saw Satan fall like lightning from heaven. I have given you authority to trample on snakes and scorpions and to overcome all the power of the enemy; nothing will harm you” (Luke 10:17-19).

When he appointed them to be his missionaries, Jesus delegated a portion of his authority to the seventy-two. So, their representation of him was not simply symbolic. Rather, they were his authorized agents. They were not infallible teachers, but they did have authority to cast out demons and to proclaim the arrival of the kingdom.
Similar to this, the apostles were authoritative ambassadors. But their representation of Christ differed from other disciples in two significant ways in the book of Acts. First, Luke’s stories make it clear that the apostles were not only appointed to the mission of spreading the gospel, but also perpetually appointed to an office of the church. In Acts the apostles were not supplanted by some other persons or offices. They bore Christ’s delegated authority perpetually, not just for a limited time. Second, the apostles were authorized to speak to all matters related to the establishment and governance of Christ’s church. As the record of the Jerusalem Council in Acts 15 indicates, the word of the apostles was to be accepted by the church at large. Whatever judgments they rendered were to be received as the will of God. Listen to the way Peter described apostolic authority in 2 Peter 3:2:

> I want you to recall ... the command given by our Lord and Savior through your apostles (2 Peter 3:2).

As Peter indicated here, the apostles’ words were to be received because they served as faithful stewards of Jesus’ will and teaching.
Having described the apostles’ function, we should turn to the way God blessed their particular and unique ministry through the spread of the gospel.


#### Blessing

In the book of Acts, God blessed the apostles by giving them converts almost every time they preached the gospel. As we have seen, Peter’s sermon on the day of Pentecost expanded the church from about 120 people to over 3,000 people. And this kind of blessing continued throughout the book of Acts. 
As an author, Luke was careful to teach his readers that this external, numerical growth of the church was evidence of God’s approval and power. One way that he did this was by quoting the words of the respected Pharisee Gamaliel. In Acts 5:38-39, Gamaliel said these words about the apostles before the Sanhedrin:

> Leave these men alone! Let them go! For if their purpose or activity is of human origin, it will fail. But if it is from God, you will not be able to stop these men; you will only find yourselves fighting against God (Acts 5:38 39).

Viewed from this perspective, the apostles’ blessed gospel ministry throughout the book of Acts is evidence that the Holy Spirit empowered and verified their ministry. 
Besides the proof offered by their function and God’s numerical blessing on their gospel ministry, the apostles’ authority can also be seen in the miracles accompanying their ministry. 


#### Miracles

Throughout the Bible, one of the main functions of miracles is to prove that God’s messengers speak the truth and bear God’s delegated authority. In the book of Exodus, Moses performed many miracles before Pharaoh to prove that he spoke for the true God. In 1 and 2 Kings, Elijah and Elisha performed miracles that confirmed that their prophecies and teachings were from God. In the Gospels, Jesus performed miracles to prove that he was the Christ, God’s anointed servant and prophet who was sent to save and to rule his people.
And in much the same way, the apostles’ miracles in the book of Acts proved that their testimony concerning Christ was true. The apostles healed the sick in Acts 5:16. They restored the lame in Acts 14:8. They raised the dead in Acts 9:40. They afflicted the wicked in Acts 13:11. They escaped from prison in Acts 12:10. They survived shipwreck in Acts 27:44, and poisonous snake bites in Acts 28:3. In fact, their power was so great that according to Acts 5:15, Peter’s shadow healed anyone it touched. And according to Acts 19:11-12, cloths touched by Paul could exorcise demons and heal disease. Miracles this powerful can only come from God, proving that the apostles were truly his authoritative witnesses. This is why Paul characterized his own miracles in this way in 2 Corinthians 12:12:

> The things that mark an apostle — signs, wonders and miracles — were done among you (2 Corinthians 12:12).

Miraculous works empowered by the Holy Spirit were the mark of an apostle, the proof that he was testifying truthfully to Christ and his work.
Now that we have looked at the apostles’ function, God’s blessing on the spread of the gospel through them, and their miracles, we are ready to see how revelation they received served as proof of their authority. 


#### Revelation

Luke recorded many times that the Holy Spirit gave guidance to the apostles, leading them to flesh out the truth of the gospel, to make decisions for the church as a whole, shaping structural elements that allowed the church to grow into maturity. For example, in Acts 10, Peter received a vision from God that taught him to bring the Gentiles into the church without requiring full conversion to Judaism. And in Acts 16, Paul received a vision that he should proclaim the gospel in Macedonia, greatly expanding the spread of the gospel of the kingdom.
For Luke’s original readers, and for the rest of the early church, the apostles’ official function, blessing in ministry, authenticating miracles, and revelation were convincing proofs of their unquestionable authority. And as Luke recorded throughout Acts, the early church responded to the apostles’ authoritative witness and leadership by accepting and submitting to all their teachings and judgments. And in the same way, modern Christians must also submit to these authoritative ambassadors of Christ, both through the summaries of their teachings in books like Acts and through their authorized writings in the New Testament.
With the unique and authoritative nature of the apostles’ witness in mind, we are ready to look at the varied ways in which they and their followers were witnesses of the gospel of Christ to the world.
