## CONCLUSION

In this lesson we explored three main themes that are woven through the book of Acts. We have looked at the Holy Spirit’s activities and gifting. We have discussed the importance of the apostles as Christ’s uniquely authoritative witnesses. And we have seen how the apostles fulfilled their appointed task by establishing the church. 
The book of Acts is a remarkable work of history and theology. As Luke wrote to Theophilus and the early church, he highlighted the vital importance of spreading the gospel of the kingdom of God through their witness to the nations of the earth in the power of the Holy Spirit. As we apply these same lessons to our lives today, we too should dedicate ourselves to the kingdom of God, looking forward to the day that Christ will return to consummate his eternal kingdom.

 



Dr. Hans F. Bayer (Host) is Professor of New Testament and Chair of the New Testament Department at Covenant Theological Seminary in St. Louis, Missouri. Dr. Bayer received his M.A. and M.Div. from Ashland Theological Seminary, and his Ph.D. from University of Aberdeen in Scotland. Born and raised in Germany, Dr. Bayer taught for ten years at the German Theological Seminary at Giessen, where he also planted and co-pastored a church. He lectures and preaches regularly throughout the U.S. and Europe and has published numerous English and German monographs, essays, dictionary articles, and commentaries, primarily on the Gospels and the Book of Acts. He is also the author of A Theology of Mark: The Dynamic Between Christology and Authentic Discipleship (P&R, 2012).

 
## GLOSSARY
 
 
apostle – A messenger, agent or ambassador sent on a mission; special New Testament office held by someone who had been taught by Jesus, had seen the risen Lord, and had been chosen for the office by the Lord himself 

apostolos – Greek word (transliteration) for "one who is sent"

Gamaliel – Jewish leader who advised the Sanhedrin to leave the apostles alone saying that if the apostles' movement was of man, it would fail, and if it was of God, they could not stop it

James (apostle) – Son of Zebedee and brother of John; martyred under Herod Agrippa

James (brother of Jesus) – Jesus' half-brother; leader of the church in Jerusalem and author of the New Testament book of James 

Jeremiah – Old Testament prophet from about 626-586 B.C., also called the "weeping prophet"; prophesied about the future of Judah and of the new covenant to come

 
Joel – Old Testament prophet who ministered sometime during the deportations to Babylon; offered hope of restoration after the exile; spoke of a future outpouring of the Holy Spirit; quoted by Peter on the Day of Pentecost in Acts 2

Matthias – Apostle chosen by the remaining 11 apostles to replace Judas Iscariot in Acts 1

Pentecost – Jewish festival, often called the "Feast of Weeks," that celebrated the early harvest; celebrated by Christians as the day the Holy Spirit was poured out on the early church 

Peter – One of Jesus' twelve apostles; also called Simon; a leader in the early Christian church; preached on the Day of Pentecost in Acts 2; according to church historians, Mark relied on Peter's accounts of Christ's life to write his gospel

ruach elohim – Hebrew term (transliteration) for "Spirit of God"

Tyrannus – Name of the person who owned a lecture hall in Ephesus where new ideas were tested and where Paul preached the gospel
