# Study Guide 
# Theological Foundations
# Module Ten – Authority in Theology

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for the final exam of the Theological Foundations course.
.
**********************************

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 – 21:22

Introduction 

I. Medieval Roman Catholicism 

	A. Authority of Scripture 

  		1. Inspiration 
  
  		2. Meaning 

  		3. Obscurity 

	B. Authority of the Church 

  		1. Past Authorities 

  		2. Contemporary Authorities 


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. Describe the posture the medieval church took regarding the authority of Scripture in regards to inspiration, meaning, and obscurity. What was their view of the human and divine origin of Scripture?

2. What was Augustine's view of how many meanings a passage of Scripture had? 

3. What is "classical polyvalence"?

4. Explain John Cassian's approach to the interpretation of Scripture called the "Quadriga". Name each sense of a passage and describe it.

5. How did the medieval Church view the clarity of the Bible? 
            
6.  What level of authority was ascribed to the early church councils by the medieval church?
            
7.  For the medieval Church, who could give valid interpretation of the Bible?

8. What led to an emphasis on ecclesiastical authority for theology during the medieval period?

9. What were the effects of the medieval period’s view of the authority of Scripture and the church?
 

