# Biblical Foundations – Module Two – The Kingdom of God in the OT

# Discussion Questions

1. What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?
2. Why is it important to you to recognize that God is sovereign? How would your life change if you did NOT believe that God was sovereign? Mention some examples.
3. What do you think Jesus meant in Matthew 6:9-10 when he taught his disciples to pray "your kingdom come"? In what ways do we see the kingdom manifested?
4. What importance does it have for you that man was made in the image of God? How does it make you feel about yourself? How does it change the way you treat others, even people that are not easy to love?
5. Read Genesis 1:28 and write down ways in which you can obey these commands. Think not only of the physical world, but also of society and culture in general.
6. What does an earthly kingdom include? How are similar things included in the kingdom of God? What things are different? 
7. Consider how the concept of the kingdom of God is important for understanding the meaning of salvation and your relationship with Christ. Write down some of your ideas.
8. What lessons can we learn from the kingdom of God expressed in the nation of Israel that would be helpful for our churches today?
9. In what ways do you think we tend to individualize salvation too much? How does the concept of the kingdom of God help correct this over-emphasis?
10. In what ways do you see the kingdom of God expanding today? What can you do to contribute to its expansion?

### REVIEW STATEMENT:

"Many Evangelicals today think of the good news, or gospel, as an explanation of the steps an individual must take to find salvation in Christ. But this wasn’t the idea that Jesus had in mind. As much as we should be ready to share how to become followers of Christ, the good news in the Scriptures is about something much more significant. Rather than referring to the salvation of any individual or group of people, the gospel is the good news of victory for the kingdom of God." (p. 2)

### CASE STUDY:

Many years ago there was a good king who reigned over a kingdom where even the poor were taken care of. The citizens of this good kingdom were happy. There was also an evil king who reigned over a kingdom where people were oppressed and taken advantage of. He was trying to overcome the good kingdom so he could be king over all. One day the good king and his army defeated the forces of evil. There were still bands of men from the evil army trying to win their kingdom back, but it was clear they had no hope. The good king extended terms of surrender to anyone who wanted to join his good kingdom. Everyone else would be banished. Some accepted his terms and joined the good kingdom.

## Reflection Questions

1. Discuss the difference between the victory over the evil kingdom with the entrance of people from the evil kingdom into the good kingdom. The gospel has implications for individual people, but also for the whole world.
2. Reflect with your learning community on this. Part of the gospel is that one day the earth will be renewed. Satan will not be able to control the earth. Yes, it will be destroyed with fire, but out of it will come the new earth mentioned in Isaiah 65 and Revelation 21.
3. Another part of the gospel is that God's people will have new bodies with greater glory and apparently greater capabilities that go beyond what bodies can do now (2 Corinthians 15). 
4. What do people in your culture think about the meaning of "the gospel"?
5. What do the people in your church think about the meaning of "the gospel?"
6. What have you thought about the meaning of "the gospel"?
7. Has this lesson modified your understanding the "the gospel? Explain and discuss with your learning community.

## Action Assignments

- Talk about the gospel to believers and include the exciting and wide sweep of what is included. Note their reaction.
- Do the same with an unbeliever. Note the reaction. Revise your presentation to make it more effective.
