# Biblical Foundations - Module Five - Why Study New Testament Theology?
# Discussion Questions 

1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	In 2 Timothy 2:15, the apostle Paul indicated that understanding the Scriptures requires hard work. How do you stay motivated in your endeavors to understand New Testament theology?


3.	How can the New Testament be authoritative for you when it was not written directly to you? Why are you convinced that the Scriptures are applicable to you?


4.	God chose to produce the words of Scripture through organic inspiration. How is this view helpful to us in affirming that the Scriptures are true and reliable? 


5.	What are some specific ways you can help and encourage others to study the background of the New Testament?


6.	When you interpret and apply the New Testament, what methods can you use to overcome the cultural discontinuities between our day and New Testament times?


7.	New Testament authors often expected their audiences to infer their implicit purposes. What steps can you take to discover the implications of New Testament texts for your circumstances? 


8.	How do you defend your commitment to the relevance of the Bible even though there are discontinuities between our day and the New Testament age?


9.	How is being aware of the continuities and discontinuities between today and the New Testament age helpful for evangelism? Give an example of how you might use these continuities and discontinuities to evangelize.

 
REVIEW STATEMENT – INSPIRATION: According to this lesson, God’s words are authoritative and they also come to us through men of God whose personality, background and intentions are revealed in the text. This doesn’t make the words any less authoritative or any less God’s words. God works in them in such a way that their words – molded by their personalities and experiences – are also what God wants to say. This is the biblical doctrine of inspiration. So in order to understand the meaning of a text of Scripture, we must consider not only the explicit assertions of the text but also the background and theological beliefs of the human author and how these affected what he wrote. We must also consider the author’s explicit and implicit purposes in writing as gleaned from the text. All this means that understanding the meaning of Scripture is more complicated than many people think.
CASE STUDY: Just before my wife and I were engaged I was on the road visiting churches for about a month. We wrote each other every day. I knew that when I got back I was going to ask her to marry me. I read every letter she sent several times. Not only did I read her letters carefully, not only did I meditate on the implications for my life, I also interpreted them through the grid of what I knew about her character, her likes and dislikes, the things she had said and done since I had met her until now, how she related to her parents and siblings, and so on. I was always relating her explicit words to the things that I knew about her from past experience.

## REFLECTION QUESTIONS:
1.	Discuss the previous case study with your learning community in terms of the importance of knowing about a person in order to properly understand their words. 
2.	Evaluate the depth of your knowledge about New Testament authors. 
3.	How would you evaluate the members of your church with regard to their knowledge of New Testament authors?
Action Assignments
•	In your learning community, make a list of the New Testament books and their human authors. Then, without referring to commentaries or other resources, write down whatever you know about these authors.
•	Commentaries on books of the Bible usually have a section on the author and his purpose in writing. When you read a book of the New Testament, make it a habit to first read about the author and his purpose in writing. If you don’t have a commentary, but have access to the internet, you can often find free commentaries online. Hold this commentary information loosely and check it against what you read in the text itself (commentaries are not always right). 
•	As you read a book of the New Testament, do so in light of what you know about the author.
