	
# Theological Foundations – Module Five – The Church
## Discussion Questions 

1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	How did Jesus build his church in a way that relied on, but also advanced, the Old Testament church?


3.	Define and discuss the word “holy” as it is used in the Bible.


4.	What does the Bible mean when it uses the word “holy” to describe the people of God?


5.	Define and describe the word “catholic” as it was understood in the Apostles’ Creed.


6.	Discuss the invisible catholic church and how it differs from the visible catholic church.


7.	In what ways is the visible church a communion of saints?


8.	Discuss how all believers in the invisible church share communion with Christ and with other believers.


9.	How is the church critical to maintaining a relationship to God?


10.	In what ways have you experienced God’s grace in the church community?


11.	In what ways do you see that the church needs to be set apart (holy) from the world?


12.	If only God ultimately knows who is in the invisible church, how should we treat those who are not yet believers?


13.	What benefits can church discipline have in a congregation?
 
REVIEW STATEMENT on THE CHURCH - SANCTION: When we say the church is sanctioned by God we mean that it was his idea and that he created it for a purpose and vested it with authority. It is the organization he created to carry out his mission in the world. Therefore, both the Old Testament church and the New Testament church have similar obligations before God.

CASE STUDY: Pastor Bob spends all of his time as a pastor encouraging and counseling his congregation. Whether in preaching and teaching or in personal visits, his goal is to care for believers that attend his church. He never shares his faith with unbelievers or teaches his congregation how to share their faith. His church has no service or mercy ministries that reach out to the surrounding community. They send no missionaries into the mission field.
## Reflection Questions
1.	What do you see as valuable about Bob’s pastoral ministry?
2.	What is Bob overlooking in his pastoral ministry?
3.	How might Ephesians 4:11-13 help Bob minister more effectively to his church congregation?
## Action Assignments
•	As the author of Hebrews says, Christians must not neglect meeting together (see Hebrews 10:25). Make sure you are attending church regularly.
•	Review the worship services you have participated in over the last month. Look for ways in which your worship service may need to be more glorifying to God. Write down the top 3 things that might improve your worship service.
•	Over the next week, intentionally engage in one activity designed to spread God’s kingdom. This may include sharing your faith with an unbeliever, participating in an evangelistic event, leading a service project or any other number of activities.
•	Spend a devotional time reading and meditating on John 15:1-17. Reflect on ways you can love God more completely by obeying him and loving one another.



