	
# Old Testament Foundations – Module Eight – The Patriarch Jacob
## Discussion Questions 

1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	How does Moses tell us the struggle between Jacob and Esau began in Genesis 25:19-34? 


3.	Describe Isaac’s interactions with the Philistines. What did Isaac’s peace with the Philistines mean for Moses’ original audience?


4.	How was God's grace to Jacob particularly relevant for Moses's original audience? 


5.	What evidence do we see in Scripture that God blessed Jacob both despite his disobedience and in response to his obedience? 


6.	When Jacob submitted to God at Jabbok he was given the new name Israel. How is this name change similar to what happens to us at conversion? Did you experience something similar after submitting your life to God? 


7.	Jacob received grace from God despite his own failings. What are some examples of times when you received grace despite your own failings? How might your experiences encourage those in your area of ministry? 


8.	How might God’s grace despite your failings help you be compassionate towards those in your churches that have failed in various ways?


9.	What can we learn from the changes God brought about in Jacob’s character during his lifetime? In what ways has God changed your character during your lifetime?


10.	What do you learn from the fact that God blessed Jacob in spite of his deceitfulness? How does this make you feel? Explain.


11.	How did this lesson help you understand the relationship between the grace of God and the need for loyalty to God?

REVIEW STATEMENT on MAJOR THEMES – GOD’S GRACE TO ISRAEL: God's grace is his favor or blessing to people who haven't earned it and don't deserve it. God showed his grace to Jacob (a) before he was born, (b) in spite of Jacob's sin, and (c) in response to Jacob's faithfulness. In none of these cases did Jacob earn God's grace. Even in the last case it was God who gave Jacob the grace to be faithful in the first place. Grace is always unmerited favor. When believers are greatly blessed by the Lord, it's easy for them to misunderstand God's grace as a sign that they are better or more spiritual than others who don't have these blessings.
Case Study: Jeremy was a Christian. He was tall, had a muscular build, had a deep booming voice and was handsome. These qualities made him stand out and as a result people noticed his other abilities as well. He was regularly chosen to be the leader in groups of which he was a part. When he went to seminary to become a pastor he stood out and everyone knew who he was. People looked up to him and he got used to it. When he became a pastor, many people came to his church because they heard about his outstanding qualities. The church grew, and Jeremy gradually began to think of himself as better than other people — and better than other pastors. Although he learned to be outwardly gracious, inside he was a mess — selfish, angry, and empty. He needed the praise of other people to make him feel good. When the church chose an associate pastor who was actually a better preacher than Jeremy, Jeremy was steaming inside. People were paying more attention to the associate pastor than to him.
## Reflection Questions 
1.	Evaluate the previous case study with your learning community. Have you seen people like this? Have you seen this tendency in yourself? 
2.	As you read over this list, think about how it makes you feel and discuss it in your learning community. Don’t talk about how it should make you feel, but how it actually does make you feel. 
a.	Does it make you feel somehow more spiritual than other people who don’t have these blessings? 
b.	Does it fill you with confidence that ends up being insensitive to people?
c.	Are you indifferent?
d.	Does it humble you? 
e.	Some other reason? 
## Action Assignments	
•	Read Luke 18:9-14 and talk about the differences between the Pharisee and the tax collector. With which one do you identify more in practice? Explain why.
•	Make a list of God’s blessings in your life, both past and present.
