# Study Guide 
# Theological Foundations
# Module Five – The Church

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for the final exam of the Theological Foundations course.
.
**********************************

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 – 31:51

Introduction 

I. Sanction 

      A. Old Testament 

      B. Jesus 

      C. Implications 


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. Explain the meaning of the "church." Give the definition of the Greek word "ekklesia" (this is the English transliteration).

2. Explain what the Apostle's Creed means when it says, "I believe in the ...church."

3. Explain the relationship between the Old Testament people of God and the New Testament people of God, according to the lesson. 

4. When did the Church start, according to the lesson? 

5. Make sure you are familiar with the contents of the following Bible passages:

  1 Peter 2:9
  Matthew 16:18
  2 Corinthians 13:5
  Matthew 28:19

6. Explain the two figures used in Romans 11:16 to represent the relationship between the Old Testament Jewish nation and the New Testament Church, including Gentile believers. Explain the implications of this verse for understanding the relationship between the Old Testament nation of Israel and the New Testament Church.

7. Explain Jesus' comments in Matthew 18:17 and what this teaches us about the church 

8. Explain the teaching of the lesson regarding the use of the Old Testament law today.
