# OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 52:00 - 1:14:55

III. Catholic 

      A. Definition 

      B. Visible Catholic Church 

      C. Invisible Catholic Church 

  	1.  One Savior 

  	2. One Religion 
 


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. What does the word "catholic" mean in the context of the Apostles’ Creed? 

2. What is the linguistic origin of the word "catholic"?

3. What was Cyprian’s understanding of the term "catholic" (in the third century A.D.)? 

4. What important event occurred in the Church in 1054 A.D.? 

5. How did the Protestant churches understand the "catholicity" of the church at the time of the Reformation? 

6. What were the three marks of the true Church, according to John Knox? 

7. How does the lesson define the "invisible catholic church"?

8. What does the lesson teach about those who sincerely follow other non Christian religions?

9. What does the lesson teach about whether salvation is possible outside the visible Church?



 
OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 1:14:55 – 1:38:22

IV. Communion 

      A. Visible Church 

  	1. Means of Grace

 	2. Spiritual Gifts 

  	3. Material Goods 

      B. Invisible Church 

  	1. Union with Christ 

  	2. Union with Believers 

Conclusion 
 


REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. What is the meaning of the Greek word "koinonia" (English transliteration) translated "communion"?

2. What are the "means of grace"? 

3. According to the lesson, who participates in the spiritual gifts?

4. According to Clement, what did some early Christians do in order to give money to the poor?

5. What does it mean to be "in Christ"? 

6. What is the theme of John 17:22-23? 
