# Thirdmill Institute

# Evangelism Badge

> And Jesus came and said to them, “All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me. Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you. And behold, I am with you always, to the end of the age. Matthew 28:18-20

In the Gospel of Matthew, these are Jesus’s final words before he was taken up into heaven. In your own life, imagine what you might say to those closest to you if you had a chance to share your final words. What would they be? They wouldn’t be about the weather, your job or the latest score of your favorite team. They would be the things closest to your heart. The same was true of Jesus here. He shared what was most important for them to hear. Making disciples was closest to his heart. Jesus’s mission and greatest longing was to spread the Gospel of the kingdom and make disciples (followers). The first step in making disciples is evangelism. In this badge, you will discuss what it means to share the Gospel in your own context and how to do it. In addition, you will have an opportunity to share your testimony with someone who doesn’t know the Lord.

## Badge Components:

Gospel presentation – you will look at what elements need to be included in a presentation of the Gospel
Personal Testimony – you will discuss how to use your own testimony to share the Gospel
Evangelism Experience – you will use what you’ve developed to share the Gospel with someone

## Discussion Topics:

1. Answer this question in your own words: What is the Gospel? Discuss your answer in your group.
2. What does evangelism look like in your country? How is it viewed? What is a common form of evangelism in your county?
3. What are the main components that must be included in a presentation of the Gospel? Make a list. Then try to narrow it down to 6 items or fewer.
4. In your country, what is the most effective way to share the Gospel? Is it through sharing with people you don’t know or sharing with people you already have a relationship with?
5. How do you share the Gospel with someone you know versus someone you don’t know?
6. Is evangelism dangerous in your country? How does this affect how you share the Gospel with others?

## Personal Testimony:

Everyone has a story or a personal testimony of how they came to put their faith in Jesus Christ as their Savior. Your testimony is powerful witness that you can use any time to make a difference in someone else’s life. Think about how you came to know Jesus as your Savior. You will prepare a short testimony of approximately 3 minutes that you can share with people.
Here are three helpful steps to think through when putting your testimony together.

Step 1:	What was your life like before you came to know Jesus, and how might that connect to someone you’re talking to?
Step 2:	What were the circumstances in how you came to know about Jesus and place your faith in him? What was it that allowed you to see that the Gospel is the truth?
Step 3:	What changed in your life after you put your faith in Christ that someone can relate to?

## Call to Action:

1. Write out your testimony, memorize it and share it with your trainer and the others in your group.
2. Share your testimony with someone who isn’t a Christian.
3. Discuss with your trainer and your group how it went. What went well? What could you improve?

## Badge Criteria:

This badge shall be awarded by Thirdmill Institute as a part of the Foundations Certificate upon successful completion of the call to action by the student in a manner that is faithfully consistent with the badge components and in light of the topics discussed throughout the course.
