## Discussion Topics:

1. Answer this question in your own words: What is the Gospel? Discuss your answer in your group.
2. What does evangelism look like in your country? How is it viewed? What is a common form of evangelism in your county?
3. What are the main components that must be included in a presentation of the Gospel? Make a list. Then try to narrow it down to 6 items or fewer.
4. In your country, what is the most effective way to share the Gospel? Is it through sharing with people you don’t know or sharing with people you already have a relationship with?
5. How do you share the Gospel with someone you know versus someone you don’t know?
6. Is evangelism dangerous in your country? How does this affect how you share the Gospel with others?

## Personal Testimony:

Everyone has a story or a personal testimony of how they came to put their faith in Jesus Christ as their Savior. Your testimony is powerful witness that you can use any time to make a difference in someone else’s life. Think about how you came to know Jesus as your Savior. You will prepare a short testimony of approximately 3 minutes that you can share with people.
Here are three helpful steps to think through when putting your testimony together.

Step 1:	What was your life like before you came to know Jesus, and how might that connect to someone you’re talking to?
Step 2:	What were the circumstances in how you came to know about Jesus and place your faith in him? What was it that allowed you to see that the Gospel is the truth?
Step 3:	What changed in your life after you put your faith in Christ that someone can relate to?

## Call to Action:

1. Write out your testimony, memorize it and share it with your trainer and the others in your group.
2. Share your testimony with someone who isn’t a Christian.
3. Discuss with your trainer and your group how it went. What went well? What could you improve?

## Badge Criteria:

This badge shall be awarded by Thirdmill Institute as a part of the Foundations Certificate upon successful completion of the call to action by the student in a manner that is faithfully consistent with the badge components and in light of the topics discussed throughout the course.
