# Study Guide 
# Biblical Foundations
# Module Five – The Gospel of John

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for this course’s final exam.

**********************************

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 – 35:06

Introduction

I. Background

      A. Author

  	1. Traditional View

  	2. Personal History

      B. Occasion

  	1. Location

  	2. Audience

  	3. Date

  	4. Purpose


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. What other New Testament books did the author of the Gospel of John write? 

2. Explain the general position throughout history regarding the authorship of the fourth gospel.

3. What is the external evidence that John is the author of the fourth gospel? Give the information about the earliest manuscripts of the fourth gospel that include John as the author.

4. What is the internal evidence that John is the author of the fourth gospel? Explain the teaching of the lesson about vocabulary and themes, as well as the evidence that the author was an eye witness of the life of Christ. 

5. Write the quote and the name of the author who was quoted by Eusebius, in Ecclesiastical History (AD 325) regarding the author of the fourth gospel. 

6. Give key information about the family of John, the author of the fourth gospel.

7. Give key information about the life of John, the author of the fourth gospel.

8. Where was John when he wrote his gospel?

9. Describe the audience to whom John was especially addressing his gospel. 

10. Give the probable date for the composition of the gospel of John, and give the key arguments for these dates. 

11. Give the information regarding the oldest manuscript that contains a part of the Gospel of John, including both names and the date.

12. What was the purpose of the gospel of John? 

13. Write down the quote that scholars have said about the contents of the Gospel of John. 


 

