## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 35:06 – 1:20:55

II. Structure and Content

      A. Introduction (1:1-18)

      B. Jesus' Public Ministry (1:19-12:50) 

  	1. Preparation for Ministry

  	2. First Passover 

  	3. Unnamed Feast

  	4. Second Passover

  	5. Feast of Tabernacles

  	6.  Feast of Dedication

  	7. Third Passover 

      C. Jesus' Private Ministry (13:1-20:31)

  	1. Last Supper

  	2. Death and Resurrection

      D. Conclusion (21:1-25) 


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. What four main ideas are found in John 1:10-14? 

2. Name the main divisions that the lesson gives for the Gospel of John, and match them with the four themes found in John 1:10-14. 

3. What was Jesus' first miracle, according to the Gospel of John? 

4. Why are the miracles in the Gospel of John often called "signs"? 

5. What names are often given to Jesus in the Gospel of John? What does "Rabbi" mean?

6. How does the lesson define saving faith? 

7. In the section of the Gospel of John called "Jesus' Public Ministry," according to what are most of the sections divided, according to the outline given in the lesson? 

8. Explain the background and the significance of the Feast of Dedication? 

9. Explain the historical importance of Antiochus Epiphanes. Why was he important to the Jews? Why was he called "Epiphanes"?

10. According to the lesson, what was symbolized by Jesus when He washed the disciples' feet? 

11. According to the lesson, what is the climax of John's narrative? 

12. Make sure you are familiar with the contents of the following Bible passages:
	John 1:10-14
	John 15:1-5
	John 14:26
	John 17

 
## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 1:20:55 – 2:03:46

III. Major Themes

      A. Believing

      B. Christ

      C. Son of God

      D. Life

Conclusion


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. What are the four major themes of the Gospel of John, according to the lesson?

2. There is a word that John uses 106 times, and that the other three gospels only use 34 times all together. What word is it? 

3. What was the significance of the tabernacle and the temple?

4. Explain how the tabernacle and the temple were reminders of the Garden of Eden. 

5. In what way did Jesus fulfill the meaning of the tabernacle and the temple?

6. Explain how Jesus fulfilled the purpose of the Passover, the Feast of Tabernacles, and the Feast of Dedication.

7. What phrase did Jesus use 24 times in the Gospel of John to refer to Himself? Why did it cause the Jews to seek to kill Him?

8. Explain the meaning of "eternal life," as used in the Gospel of John.

