## Vice-Regents

We find this description of Adam and Eve in Genesis 1:26 where we read these words:

> Then God said, “Let us make man in our image, after our likeness. And let them have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the heavens and over the livestock and over all the earth and over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth” (Genesis 1:26).

Everyone familiar with the Scriptures knows that this and many other passages in the Old and New Testaments call human beings the “image” or “likeness” of God. In the past, most theologians thought this simply meant that human beings are rational, moral and religious creatures. But, as true as these traditional Christian outlooks are, this isn’t the focus of Genesis 1.

To understand the significance of God calling human beings his image and likeness, it helps to know a common practice in the ancient world. Outside of Israel, pharaohs, kings and emperors were often called “images,” “likenesses” and even “sons” of their gods. They were thought to be the living images that represented their gods’ interests on earth. As heaven’s representatives, kings had the special task in ancient societies of learning the will of their gods in heaven, and then using their royal authority to accomplish this will on earth. It’s no wonder then that Jesus called on his followers to pray for God’s will to be done on earth as it is in heaven. This was his royal task.

In Acts 7:22, Stephen recalled that Moses learned the ways of the courts of Egypt. Moses knew all too well that the Pharaohs of Egypt and the kings of other nations were often called “images,” “likenesses” or “sons” of their gods to set them apart from ordinary human beings. But under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, Moses opposed this widespread false belief. In the beginning, the true God of Israel had actually declared that all human beings — not just a handful of kings and emperors — were the images of God, the true royal priests of God. This must have been a difficult lesson for ancient Israelites to believe. It required these former slaves to transform how they viewed themselves and their role in the world. God had ordained every Israelite, along with every other human being, to serve as his royal, priestly representatives.

And in our day, modern secular cultures often teach us that human beings are little more than the result of random historical circumstances. But the biblical account requires us to conform our view of ourselves and our view of other people according to what God first said about us. We are all created as God’s priestly, royal images, called to ensure that God’s will is accomplished on the earth as it is in heaven.

In Genesis 1:27-28 we find that God elaborated on the service of humanity as he uttered words of blessing from his heavenly throne:

> So God created man in his own image, in the image of God he created him; male and female he created them. And God blessed them. And God said to them, “Be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the heavens and over every living thing that moves on the earth” (Genesis 1:27-28).

From the beginning God called every human being to be his priestly, royal image, and to fulfill what theologians often call “the cultural mandate.”

As we’ve seen, God established a measure of order and beauty in creation, and he put humanity in his wondrous, holy garden to serve him as royal priests. The great King of heaven ordained humanity as the instrument for his kingdom’s expansion. Human beings were to multiply, to spread out, and to make the entire earth like God’s garden in order that they might bring the will of God to the earth and serve him throughout the world. Extending God’s kingdom throughout the world was the very purpose for which God put human beings on the earth.

Now, I think we have to admit that as modern people we seldom think of the purpose of our existence in these ways. When someone asks you, “What do you do?” how often have you responded, “Well, I’m fruitful. I multiply. I fill the earth, I subdue it and have dominion on behalf of God”? These concepts are so foreign to many followers of Christ that we seldom think of describing what we do with our lives in these ways. So, don’t be surprised if you find yourself confused about the purpose of your life. We need to find our purpose in life by taking to heart what God first said about human beings. We were made to be God’s royal priests. We were created to ensure that the rule of God is spread to the ends of the earth so that one day the entire creation will be filled with God’s visible glory to his endless praise.

We’ve seen that in the primeval history God established earth as the place of his kingdom, and people as the servants of his kingdom. Now we should briefly sketch the progress of God’s developing, earthly kingdom during this time.
