# PROGRESS

If Adam and Eve had not fallen into sin, the path of humanity’s service as the image of God would have been a rather straightforward matter. Adam and Eve would have had children, their offspring would have had children of their own, and so on. And together these large numbers of God’s priestly, royal images would have filled the earth, subdued it and had dominion according to the commands of God. But as we know all too well, things did not go in this direction. Sin quickly turned humanity’s straight path into a long, twisting road of trouble. Yet, despite these troubles early in the primeval history, God assured the humanity that his purpose for them would not fail.

There’s much that could be said about the progress of God’s kingdom during the primeval period, but we’ll summarize it in three steps. In the first place, we’ll speak of the cosmic treason that took place. Second, we’ll look at how the corruption of humanity increased and led to severe divine judgment. But third, we’ll find that God established a long-term strategy that would enable humanity to fulfill his kingdom purposes. Let’s look first at the cosmic treason that took place against the divine King.

## Cosmic Treason

Instead of faithfully fulfilling what their divine King had commanded, Adam and Eve succumbed to Satan’s temptation and rebelled by eating the forbidden fruit. So, instead of spreading the Garden of Eden to the ends of the earth, they were cast out of the Garden to live under a curse. Still, humanity’s responsibilities as kingdom builders didn’t end. Adam and Eve and their descendants were still to multiply and to have dominion over the earth in God’s service. Yet, God cursed humanity and the earth so that multiplication and dominion became painful, difficult and frustrating. Regarding multiplication, in Genesis 3:16 God said these words to Eve:

> I will surely multiply your pain in childbearing; in pain you shall bring forth children (Genesis 3:16).

Regarding dominion, in verse 17 God warned Adam in this way:

> Cursed is the ground because of you; in pain you shall eat of it all the days of your life (Genesis 3:17).

Sadly, the priestly, royal images of God were forced to dwell in a hostile world and experience pain and futility in the mission on which God had set them.

The record of the progress of God’s kingdom during the primeval period began with Adam and Eve’s cosmic treason. But their descendants pursued a path of corruption that eventually led to severe judgment from God.
