## Kingdom of Priests

In Exodus 19:4-6, God declared this purpose for Israel in no uncertain terms. At Mount Sinai, he made the following declaration:

> You yourselves have seen what I did to the Egyptians, and how I bore you on eagles’ wings and brought you to myself. Now therefore, if you will indeed obey my voice and keep my covenant, you shall be my treasured possession among all peoples, for all the earth is mine; and you shall be to me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation (Exodus 19:4-6).

Here we see that Israel was to be a “holy nation” — that is, special, separated, distinguished as God’s treasured possession from all other peoples. As his holy people, God called the entire nation of Israel a “kingdom of priests” or, as it may be translated, a “royal priesthood.”

> Exodus 19:6 and particularly the phrase “kingdom of priests” serves as a kind of echo of the original calling of humankind, male and female, in Genesis 1. I think they are called to be king, to have a kingly role over creation, to rule over creation… Also, in the immediate context, right after the phrase “kingdom of priests” is the phrase “a holy nation.” Israel is to be a holy nation; priests are to be holy and reflect God’s holiness, and Israel is to reflect God’s holiness too by consecrating themselves through the various laws that make up the Torah. — Dr. Douglas Gropp

This designation of Israel shows that Israel was called to further the role that Adam and Eve had as the image of God in the very beginning. The development of the tribes of Israel into a kingdom of priests enabled them to move the kingdom of God on earth forward.

Although God’s selection of Israel gave his people the privileges and responsibilities of becoming a kingdom of priests, we should also note that God called some Israelites to lead in the specialized offices of priests and kings.

## Priests and Kings

Aaron and his descendants became the official priests of Israel to lead the nation into the special presence of God in the tabernacle, and later at the temple. They led the worship, sacrifice, prayers and praise of Israel. They also instructed Israel in the law of God. And after the time of Saul, God ordained David and his descendants to serve as kings over Israel. The dynasty of David was ordained not only to supervise the true worship of God, but also to enforce obedience to God in Israel and in other nations on earth. From this time forward, David’s house was to lead the worldwide expansion of God’s kingdom. And of course, this is why the New Testament emphasizes so much that Jesus, the son of David, is the great high priest and king over God’s people today. He alone fulfills all that these offices were designed to accomplish.

With the place and people of the kingdom in the nation of Israel in mind, we should also mention the progress of the kingdom that took place through the nation of Israel.
