## Center

During the primeval history, Eden and its sacred garden were the geographical centerpiece of God’s kingdom. From there, humanity was to extend God’s rule to the ends of the earth. Later, God built his kingdom in the nation of Israel in the Promised Land. And from there, God’s people began to spread the kingdom to the ends of the earth. This centerpiece of God’s reign on earth was so crucial to Old Testament faith that we shouldn’t be surprised to find that it was also crucial in the life of Jesus, Israel’s Messiah.

Apart from a brief time in Egypt during his childhood, Jesus spent his entire life in the Promised Land. Jesus was born in the land of Israel. He grew up, called his disciples, ministered, died, was resurrected, and ascended into heaven from there. And even on the Day of Pentecost, Jesus gathered many Jews who had been scattered among the nations back to the land of Promise to hear the good news.

To understand why this location of Jesus’ earthly ministry is so important, we must keep in mind what had happened in the Promised Land before Jesus’ birth. Under the rule of David and his descendants, God established Israel as a kingdom in the Promised Land. But toward the end of Old Testament history, a great tragedy occurred. The people of Israel and their kings rebelled against God to such an extent that God drove most Israelites into exile from the land. Gentile nations and the false, demonic gods they served, ruled over even the Israelites who still lived among the ruins of the Promised Land.

Before Jesus came to earth, the children of Israel had suffered under this judgment from God for more than 500 years. Even during Jesus’ earthly ministry, the Promised Land was under the rule of the Roman Empire. The land was filled with sin and darkness. It was overrun with evil spirits. But Jesus came to reverse these dire circumstances and to bring the final stages of God’s kingdom to the earth. Listen to Luke’s account in Luke 4:17-19 of one of Jesus’ earliest sermons at the synagogue in Nazareth:

> The scroll of the prophet Isaiah was given to [Jesus]. He unrolled the scroll and found the place where it was written, “The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to proclaim good news to the poor. He has sent me to proclaim liberty to the captives and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty those who are oppressed, to proclaim the year of the Lord’s favor” (Luke 4:17-19).

Here Jesus referred to Old Testament hopes for the eventual success of God’s kingdom purposes. This prophecy, from Isaiah 61, predicted that God would pour out blessings on his people when the judgment of exile came to an end. Jesus mentioned “the poor,” “the captives,” “the blind” and “oppressed” to acknowledge the terrible conditions the people of Israel had endured under the curse of exile. But he also reminded those with him that someone was promised to bring the exile to an end. He will have “the Spirit of the Lord” upon him; someone whom God “anointed.” This Anointed One, the messianic King, will proclaim “the year of the Lord’s favor,” or grace toward his people. He will proclaim “good news,” or gospel, to “the poor,” “liberty to the captives,” “recovery of sight” for the blind, and he will “set at liberty those who are oppressed.” Now listen to what Jesus did in Luke 4:20-21, after reading these words of hope:

> [Jesus] rolled up the scroll and gave it back to the attendant and sat down. And the eyes of all in the synagogue were fixed on him. And he began to say to them, “Today this Scripture has been fulfilled in your hearing” (Luke 4:20-21).

Jesus boldly proclaimed that he was the one predicted in the Old Testament to end Israel’s exile and to bring the outpouring of God’s blessings to his people. This is why the New Testament focuses so much on what Jesus did in the Promised Land. He came first to the land of Israel to redeem a remnant of Abraham’s faithful children at the geographical center of God’s kingdom on earth.

Now, it’s important to note that the geographical center of God’s kingdom in the New Testament was the Promised Land. But it’s just as important to keep in view that the final, and utterly successful, geographical expansion of God’s kingdom to the ends of the earth was set in motion by Jesus’ first advent.
