## Believers

At the very beginning of the New Testament period, the Christian church consisted nearly exclusively of Jewish people — Abraham’s physical descendants who repented and trusted in Jesus as the Christ. Jesus and his apostles and prophets were Jewish, and everyone who believed on the day of Pentecost was Jewish. In these early days of the New Testament age, God gathered a faithful remnant of Jews from those living in the Promised Land and from those who had been scattered among the Gentiles.

But it wasn’t long before something quite surprising happened. God began to fulfill his promise that Abraham and his seed would spread the blessings of God’s kingdom by bringing Gentiles in large numbers into God’s kingdom. This is why the New Testament speaks of all followers of Christ, including Gentile believers, as renewed images of God. As Paul explained in Ephesians 4:24, believers are to:

> Put on the new self, created after the likeness of God in true righteousness and holiness (Ephesians 4:24).

And this is also why, in 1 Peter 2:9, Peter described the New Testament church — consisting of both Jews and Gentiles — as God’s royal priesthood.

There he wrote:

> You are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for [God’s] own possession, that you may proclaim the excellencies of him who called you out of darkness into his marvelous light (1 Peter 2:9).

Here Peter referred to Exodus 19:6, where God first called the nation of Israel his “kingdom of priests.” But Peter applied these words to the church, both Jews and Gentiles.

Followers of Christ from every race on earth are adopted into Abraham’s family so that the entire Christian church is “a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for God’s own possession.” All followers of Christ serve as God’s royal priests in the world. We “proclaim the excellencies of Christ” and fulfill the mission first given to Israel as those who lead the world into the blessings of God.

> In 1 Peter 2:8-9, Peter tells God’s people who they are and that they are a chosen race, they are actually people who have been taken out of the world; they belong to God. But they are people with purpose, and that is, they act a role of priesthood where actually they can intercede, not like the old priests who will offer sacrifices, but they actually intercede for people, God’s people… God has placed us here for a purpose, and that is, actually, to declare his excellencies so that many people might get to know him and believe in him. But we are also called to be different, and that is, we are actually holy people. We are to be set apart. — Dr. Vuyani Sindo

Now that we’ve seen both the place and the people of the kingdom in the New Testament age, we should turn to the progress of the kingdom in the New Testament.
