The Apostles’ Creed
Lesson Three
Jesus Christ
INTRODUCTION

For the past two millennia, billions of people have worshipped, followed and proclaimed the gospel of Jesus of Nazareth. No other figure in history has been as widely admired or had as much impact on society. Artists, musicians and authors have made him the subject of their art. Whole nations and cultures have been built around his teachings. In many parts of the world, even the calendar is counted from the time of his birth. 
But as well-known as Jesus is, he is still the subject of intense scrutiny. Scholars of every kind research him. Skeptics try to discredit him. And his followers study him in every way imaginable. 
And the fact is that learning about Jesus is important for everyone, because one day we will all have to answer the question “Who is Jesus Christ?” For Christians, the answer should be familiar, because we have been reciting it for centuries in the Apostles’ Creed.
This is the third lesson in our series The Apostles’ Creed, and we have entitled it “Jesus Christ.” In this lesson, we will turn our attention to the articles of faith that affirm belief in Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the second person of the Trinity. These articles read as follows:

I believe in Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord, Who was conceived by the Holy Spirit, And born of the Virgin Mary. He suffered under Pontius Pilate, Was crucified, died, and was buried; He descended into hell. The third day he rose again from the dead. He ascended into heaven And is seated at the right hand of God the Father Almighty. From there he will come to judge the living and the dead. 
While there are many ways to summarize what the creed says about Jesus, we will focus on three themes that have been common focal points throughout the history of theology. First, we will speak of the divinity of Jesus Christ, looking at things like the nature of his divinity, and his relationship to the other members of the Trinity. Second, we will look at his humanity, and discuss the relationship between his divine and human natures. And third, we will talk about his work, not only during his earthly ministry, but also after it. Let’s start with the way the divinity of Jesus Christ is addressed in the Apostles’ Creed.



DIVINITY
	
When we talk about the divinity of Christ, or even more properly, the deity of Christ — the fact that he is fully God — we are talking about the central claim of the New Testament concerning who Christ is. What we are told is that Jesus is fully God and fully man. The moment we back off of either of those, we no longer have Jesus. The only way we can explain Jesus in terms of his deity is exactly as the Bible declares him. We are told that he is the Son of the living God. This is the most fundamental fact preached by the early church. And what we have, for instance, from the Apostle Paul — what he writes in Colossians — our assurance is that actually he (Jesus) is the great power over all things. In him all things are created. He has all powers under his feet. That can be said only of God. You take that out, we have no gospel, we have no Jesus, and we have no Christianity.

— Dr. R. Albert Mohler, Jr.

The Apostles’ Creed mentions the divinity of Jesus in these words:

I believe in Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord.

Christians have always intended words like “Christ,” “Son of God,” and “Lord” to indicate Jesus’ divinity. 
For our purposes, we will focus on just two of the terms the Apostles’ Creed uses to point to Jesus’ divinity. On the one hand, we will look at the fact that Jesus is the Son of God. And on the other hand, we will investigate what it means for Jesus to be Lord. Let’s begin with the meaning of the term “Son of God” that Scripture applies to Jesus.


SON OF GOD

The first thing we should note about the language “Son of God” is that Scripture often uses it to talk about beings that are not divine in any way. For example, the angels are referred to as sons of God in passages like Job 1:6 and 2:1. In some modern versions of the Bible, these verses are translated to say “angels” rather than sons of God. But in the passages from Job, the Hebrew actually says, “benay haelohim,” which literally means “sons of God.” And we find similar language in other passages.
The nation of Israel is also called God’s son in verses like Exodus 4:22, and Hosea 11:1. The human kings of Israel were also referred to as God’s sons in places like 2 Samuel 7:14, and Psalm 2:7. Adam, the first human being, is called the son of God in Luke 3:38. 
And as all Christians know, in many passages in Scripture God’s faithful believers are called his sons. We see this in places like Matthew 5:9, 45, Luke 20:36, and Romans 8:14, 19. As Paul wrote in Galatians 3:26:


You are all sons of God through faith in Christ Jesus (Galatians 3:26).

But if the title “son of God” does not in and of itself mean that Jesus is divine, why has the church made such a big deal about it?
When we look at how the New Testament talks about Jesus, it becomes clear that he is God’s son in a unique way.

In fact, one of the most emphatic things that we find in the New Testament is that Jesus is the unique Son of God. That he shares in the very essence of who God is. Or another way of putting that is that Jesus is very God of very God. And we are the children of God by relationship, by adoption, but not by essence. Jesus is the eternal Son of God. He has always been the Son of God.

—	Dr. Thomas R. Schreiner

Jesus’ unique sonship is especially clear in the Gospel of John. For instance, in John 1:1-18, we are told that Jesus is the eternal word of God, meaning that he is both God himself, and the only begotten of the Father. We also see it in John 8:18-23, where Jesus said that as the Father’s Son, he had come from above, that he had not originated in this world. And we find it in John 10:30 where Jesus insisted that he and the Father are one.
But perhaps the most obvious place where John made this clear was in John 5:18. Listen to what he wrote there:

[Jesus] was even calling God his own Father, making himself equal with God (John 5:18). 

This passage makes it clear that when Jesus spoke of himself as God’s Son, he meant that he was equal with God the Father. For this reason, Christians have rightly understood that when the Bible says that Jesus is the Son of God, it means that he is both unique and divine.
Jesus’ divine sonship is also mentioned in many other New Testament passages. We find it in Romans 1:3-4, and 8:3 where Paul taught that Jesus was God’s divine Son even before the incarnation. We see in Hebrews 1:1-3 where we are told that as the Son of God, Jesus created the universe and is the exact representation of the Father’s being. In these and many other places, Jesus is identified as God’s Son in a special way that indicates his eternal, divine nature.
This emphasis on Jesus as the divine and eternal Son of God is reflected in the doctrine of the Trinity, which states that:

God has three persons, but only one essence.

The New Testament teaches that Jesus is God the Son, one of the three persons of the Trinity. But what is his relationship to the Father and the Holy Spirit?
As we have discussed in prior lessons, the ontological perspective on the Trinity focuses on God’s being and existence. As the Son of God, Christ is equal in power and glory to the Father and the Holy Spirit. All three of God’s persons — including the Son — are infinite, eternal and unchangeable. And each has the same essential divine attributes, such as wisdom, power, holiness, justice, goodness and truth. 
By contrast, the economic perspective on the Trinity describes how God’s persons interact with each other. From this view, each one has different responsibilities, different levels of authority, and different assigned roles. For example, Christ has always been the Father’s Son, subordinate to the Father’s authority. Listen to what Jesus said in John 6:38, where he described his submission to the Father:

I have come down from heaven not to do my will but to do the will of him who sent me (John 6:38).

And he made a similar claim in John 8:28-29, where we read these words:

Jesus said … “I do nothing on my own but speak just what the Father has taught me. The one who sent me is with me; he has not left me alone, for I always do what pleases him” (John 8:28-29).

Throughout the New Testament the Son is subordinate to the Father’s authority. There is no conflict between them, because the Son and the Father always agree. But the higher rank belongs to the Father.
In a similar way, within the economy of the Trinity, the Son has authority over the Holy Spirit. For example, listen to Jesus’ words in John 15:26:

When the Counselor comes, whom I will send to you from the Father … he will testify about me (John 15:26).

In other passages, such as Romans 8:9 and 1 Peter 1:11, the Holy Spirit is actually called the “Spirit of Christ,” again indicating that the Spirit is sent by Christ. 
These relationships are summarized in the identification of the Son as the second person of the Trinity. He is the second person of the ontological Trinity because he is generated by the first person, namely the Father, and he breathes out the third person, namely the Holy Spirit. And he is the second person of the economic Trinity because he holds the middle rank. He is subordinate to the Father, but he has authority over the Holy Spirit.
In the early church, the confession that Jesus Christ was fully divine was a critical aspect of the Christian faith. Those who confessed the Apostles’ Creed at their baptisms were not required to affirm all the finer points of theology with regard to the inner workings of the Trinity. But they were expected to proclaim the deity of Christ without hesitation. Even today, affirming that Jesus is truly and fully God is a hallmark of biblical Christianity.
Now that we have looked at the significance of the term “Son of God,” we are ready to see how the title “Lord” points to Jesus’ divinity.


LORD

When the New Testament calls Jesus Lord, it is translating the Greek word kurios. Kurios was a rather common word meaning ruler or master, and it was even used as a polite form of address, like the English word “sir.” As such, kurios was frequently applied to mere human beings, as in Matthew 10:24, Luke 12:36-47, Ephesians 6:5-9, and many other places.
At the same time, the New Testament also used the word kurios as a name for God, as in Matthew 11:25, Luke 1:16, Acts 2:39, and many other passages. Given this range of meaning, why should we think that the use of the word kurios in the New Testament implies that Jesus is divine? Why shouldn’t we think that it simply refers to his earthly authority or honor?

The key to Christian use of the word kurios is the Old Testament. The Old Testament Scriptures were written in Hebrew. Yet, a couple centuries before Christ was born, the Hebrew text was translated into Greek. This translation is called the Septuagint. When Jewish scholars translated the Old Testament into Greek, they used the Greek term kurios 6,700 times to translate the sacred name by which God revealed himself to his people: Yahweh. This backdrop is absolutely crucial for understanding the New Testament confession of Jesus’ kurios. Although the term kurios by itself does not necessarily imply Jesus is divine, the use of this term against its Old Testament backdrop clearly implies Jesus’ divinity in a number of texts. 

—	Dr. Keith Johnson


One of the most amazing passages in the New Testament is where it talks about “every knee will bow and every tongue will confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father” [Philippians 2]. And actually, Paul, at that moment is quoting from Isaiah, where it was a hymn of praise that everyone would confess that Yahweh was the Lord. Now, he’s deliberately taking that Old Testament passage and saying that instead Jesus Christ is the Lord. And at that moment it’s quite clear the New Testament is saying Jesus Christ is not just a master, he is to be identified with the Lord God of Israel. 

—	Dr. Peter Walker

Listen to what Paul wrote in Romans 10:9, 13: 

If you confess with your mouth, “Jesus is Lord,” and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved… [F]or, “Everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved” (Romans 10:9, 13).

In verse 13 of this passage Paul quoted Joel 2:32 in order to prove that everyone who calls on the name of Jesus will be saved. But in this verse from Joel in the Hebrew Old Testament, the name of the Lord was Yahweh, the proper name of God. Put simply, when Paul said that Jesus is Lord, he meant that Jesus is Yahweh, the Lord and God of the Old Testament.
Other New Testament passages that equate Jesus with God in the Old Testament include Matthew 3, Mark 1, Luke 3 and John 1, where Jesus is the Lord from Isaiah 40 whose path John the Baptist has prepared. We see the same dynamic in Hebrews 1:10, where the Lord Jesus is the God that Psalm 102:24-25 credit with creating the world. The list could go on and on.
Now, this is not to say that every time people in the New Testament called Jesus “Lord,” they recognized his divinity. Sometimes they simply intended to show him human respect. But when the church formally confesses that Jesus is Lord, as we do in the Apostles’ Creed, we are affirming the biblical teaching that Jesus Christ is God, and that as God he is a full member of the Trinity, with the same divine attributes as the Father and the Holy Spirit. 
The divinity of Christ has all kinds of implications for the Christian life. For instance, it means that we should acknowledge and worship Jesus as God in our prayers and songs. It means that we should pray to him, just as we do to the Father and the Spirit. And it means that we can take great comfort in the security of our salvation, knowing that God himself has redeemed us from sin. These and many other practical concerns in the Christian life rest on the belief that Jesus is divine. 
With this understanding of the divinity of Jesus in mind, we are ready to turn our attention to the way his humanity is reflected in the Apostles’ Creed.

