HUMANITY

In the last couple centuries, many theologians have readily accepted that Jesus was human, but they have questioned his divinity. But in the early centuries of the church, it was at least as common for people to question the humanity of Jesus. Influential philosophies of that day made it relatively easy for people to accept that a god could disguise himself as a human being. But it was very hard for them to accept the idea that a god could actually become a human being. Human beings were physical and emotional beings. In their estimation, God would not compromise his own glory and dignity by taking on a lowly, creaturely, human nature. Sadly, many modern Christians also have trouble believing that God the Son could come to earth and take on full humanity, with all its weaknesses, limitations, and frailties. 
To demonstrate that Jesus was a full human being, we will speak of three broad features of his humanity. First, we will talk about his human experiences. Second, we will discuss his human office. And third, we will say a few words about his human nature and its relationship to his divine nature. Let’s begin by looking at his human experiences that are listed in the Apostles’ Creed.


EXPERIENCES

Several of Jesus’ experiences prove that he was truly human because only human beings have such experiences. Listen to following assertions from the creed:

[Jesus] was conceived by the Holy Spirit, And born of the Virgin Mary. He suffered under Pontius Pilate, Was crucified, died, and was buried; He descended into hell. The third day he rose again from the dead. 
These experiences affirm at least four aspects of Jesus’ humanity: his generation, his body, his soul, and his resurrection. We’ll start by looking at his generation, which included his conception and birth.


Generation

The Apostles’ Creed speaks of Jesus’ generation with these words: 

[He] was conceived by the Holy Spirit, And born of the Virgin Mary. 
Admittedly, there were some very unusual details related to Jesus’ conception and birth. First, he was conceived by the Holy Spirit rather than by a human father. He was also conceived in a way that did not violate his mother’s virginity. We will speak of these details at greater length later in this lesson. For now, though, we want to focus on the basic ideas of conception and birth as essentially human experiences.
When the Apostles’ Creed says that Jesus “was conceived”, it has in mind that Jesus began in the same way that all human beings after Adam and Eve have begun: as a tiny baby in his mother’s womb. Passages like Matthew 1:18, Luke 2:5-6; Galatians 4:4 and Hebrews 10:5 indicate that God formed Jesus in Mary’s womb in the same way that he molds every human baby.
Luke 1:34-37 records this conversation between Mary and the angel Gabriel regarding Mary’s pregnancy: 

“How will this be,” Mary asked the angel, “since I am a virgin?” The angel answered, “The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you…. For nothing is impossible with God” (Luke 1:34-37).

Mary herself recognized that to conceive a child in this way would take a miracle. And a miracle is exactly what she got. 

What Jesus’ miraculous conception does is to ensure that he’s fully divine as well as fully human, but it does not make him less than fully human. It is true that the conception is a miracle, perhaps one of the greatest miracles that redemptive history has ever known. And yet, from the point of Jesus’ conception forward, his gestation and development in the womb is like any other human being. His passing through the birth canal: normal human birthing process. His being dependent on his mother for his nourishment and his feeding, and everything from having runny noses to having to have his diapers changed is ordinary, normal human experience. He is more than just human, but not less than fully human. 

—	Dr. Robert G. Lister

It is sometimes argued that Jesus could not have been truly human because he did not have a human father. But the very first humans didn’t have fathers either, or mothers for that matter. As Genesis 2 tells us, Adam was molded from the dust of the earth, and Eve was created from Adam’s rib. Neither of them had parents. Neither of them was born from a woman. But they were both fully and truly human. In the same way, Jesus was also fully human even though his conception was far beyond ordinary.
And from all that we know from Scripture, Jesus’ growth in Mary’s womb was also a perfectly natural event, culminating in his birth. He did not appear magically, or descend from heaven at the moment he was born. On the contrary, Matthew 1 and Luke 2 indicate that Mary’s pregnancy was at first undetected, but then became obvious. It even caused her fiancé Joseph to question her fidelity, until God told him the truth in a dream. And the final result was that Jesus was born as a real human baby.
	
Jesus is fully and completely human. The miraculous conception of Christ in no way minimizes his true humanity. Jesus actually shows us humanity as it’s intended to be in the miraculous conception because we see in Christ that we are able to be fully human without being sinful, which is how we’ll be in heaven. 

—	Dr. K. Erik Thoennes

Having considered Jesus’ generation, we are ready to discuss how his body affirms his full humanity.


Body
	
Here we have in mind the Apostles’ Creed’s claim that:

[Jesus] suffered under Pontius Pilate, Was crucified, died, and was buried.

In these words, the creed attributes certain experiences to Jesus that would only have been possible if he was truly a physical human being. 
According to accounts of Jesus’ arrest and crucifixion in Matthew 27, Mark 15, Luke 23, and John 18–19, Jesus suffered under Pontius Pilate in a variety of ways. He was flogged, forced to wear a crown of thorns, spit on, mocked, repeatedly struck in the head with a staff, and forced to carry his own cross part of the way to the place of execution.
Jesus’ sufferings, crucifixion, death and burial demonstrated that he was a real man with a physical human body — one that could be beaten, one that could bleed, one that could be abused by soldiers, one that could collapse under exhaustion, one that could be killed, and one that could be buried in a tomb when his soul had left it.
And having a real human body was critical because the justice of God required that a genuine human being suffer physical divine judgment to atone for the sins of humanity. We find this emphasis in places like Romans 7:4, Colossians 1:21-22, and Hebrews 10:10.
As just one example, listen to these words from Hebrews 2:14-17:

Since the children have flesh and blood, he too shared in their humanity so that by his death he might … make atonement for the sins of the people (Hebrews 2:14-17).

As this passage makes clear, Jesus had to be flesh and blood, a physical human being, in order to make atonement for us. 
With this understanding of Jesus’ generation and body in mind, let’s look at the fact that Jesus’ soul completed his human nature.


Soul
	
Scripture regularly says that human beings consist of a mortal body that houses an immortal soul. It speaks of our souls by many different terms, but the most common are “soul” and “spirit.” Based on Hebrews 4:12 and 1 Thessalonians 5:23, some traditions have maintained that “soul” and “spirit” are different parts of our being. But there are approximately 200 verses in which one or the other of these terms is used to refer to all the inner, non-physical aspects of our being as a whole. So, it is best to conclude that the words “soul” and “spirit” both refer to the same underlying reality that man consists of only two main parts: body and soul.
In Luke 23:46, Jesus spoke of his own “soul” or “spirit” as he was dying. Listen to his words there:

Father, into your hands I commit my spirit (Luke 23:46).

When Jesus died on the cross, he indicated that while his body would be placed in the grave, his human spirit or soul would be in the hands of God the Father. 
As the spiritual side of our being, our soul is the seat of our consciousness. When our bodies die, our souls are separated from our bodies and continue in a conscious state. And the Apostles’ Creed explains that the same thing happened to Jesus when he died. Specifically, it says: 

He descended into hell. 
Here, the creed states that when Jesus died, his conscious, rational soul was separated from his body. And while his body remained in the tomb, his soul descended into hell. Later in this lesson we will investigate the meaning of this line in more depth. But for now, we simply want to point out that by mentioning Jesus’ descent into hell, the Apostles’ Creed affirms that Jesus had a real human soul.
Finally, in addition to affirming Jesus’ humanity through references to his generation, his body, and his soul, the Apostles’ Creed also speaks of Jesus’ resurrection, in which his soul was reunited with his body.


Resurrection
	
The resurrection proves that Jesus was a real human being because it reaffirms that his full, glorified human existence included the reunion of his real human body with his real human soul. The resurrection of his body occurred when his human soul was introduced into his perfected human body. Yes, his resurrected body was different in some ways because it had been glorified and was no longer mortal. But this did not make it any less physical or any less human. On the contrary, as we see throughout 1 Corinthians 15, Jesus’ resurrected body is the firstfruits of the bodily resurrections of all believers. As such, it shows us what our own human bodies will be like in the future. 
Listen to what Paul wrote in 1 Corinthians 15:20-23:

Christ has indeed been raised from the dead, the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep. For since death came through a man, the resurrection of the dead comes also through a man… But each in his own turn: Christ, the firstfruits; then, when he comes, those who belong to him (1 Corinthians 15:20-23).

Just as Adam was the first human being to be created, Jesus was the first human being to be resurrected with a glorified body. Others before him had been brought back to life, some of them raised by Jesus himself. And Enoch and Elijah had even been taken bodily into heaven without dying. But none of these had received glorified, immortal bodies. 
But even though Jesus’ body is now glorified, it is still fully human — just as we will still be fully human after God has renewed our bodies at the great resurrection of the dead. 

He was an infant baby. He was absolutely dependent upon his mother in his infancy. He grew — Luke tells us that he grew in wisdom, and in stature, and in favor with God and man. We are told that he experienced the same hunger we experience, the same thirst we experience, and on Calvary’s cross he experienced death as a human being experiences death. Now, it was far more. He was not only fully human, he was also fully God, but the reality is that Jesus is not only authentic humanity; he is perfected humanity. 

—	Dr. R. Albert Mohler, Jr.

Now that we have looked at Jesus’ humanity in terms of his experiences, let’s turn our attention to his human office mentioned in the Apostles’ Creed, namely the office of Christ.


OFFICE
	
Jesus’ office is mentioned in these words from the Apostles’ Creed:

I believe in Jesus Christ. 
In modern Christianity, many believers are unaware that the word “Christ” is actually the title of Jesus’ office rather than part of his personal name. In this regard, the word “Christ” is very similar to words like “king” or “judge.” 
We will speak of Jesus’ human office in two parts. First, we will survey the Old Testament background to the office known as “Christ.” And second, we will explain how the fulfillment of this office in Jesus points to our Lord’s humanity. Let’s begin with the Old Testament background to the office known as “Christ.”


Old Testament Background
	
The English word “Christ” is a translation of the Greek christos, which in turn is a translation of the Old Testament Hebrew word mashiach or “messiah,” meaning “anointed one.” 
In the days of the Old Testament, the term “anointed one” was a broad term that could be applied to anyone whom God appointed to serve him in a special capacity. For instance, 1 Chronicles 16:22 identifies the prophets as anointed ones. Leviticus 4:3, 5, 16 speaks of anointed priests. And in 1 Samuel 26:9, 11, 16, David referred to Saul as the Lord’s anointed because he was the king of Israel. 
Listen to the way Leviticus 21:10-12 describes the anointing of the high priest:

The high priest, the one among his brothers who has had the anointing oil poured on his head and who has been ordained to wear the priestly garments … has been dedicated by the anointing oil of his God (Leviticus 21:10-12).

As we see here, the anointing ceremony dedicated people to God’s service.
One of the most important uses of the term “anointed one” in the Old Testament applied to the descendants of David that served as kings over Israel and Judah. We see this in places like Psalm 89:38, 51, Psalm 132:10, 17, and 2 Chronicles 6:42. During David’s life, God made a covenant with David, promising to establish an unfailing kingdom on earth under the kingship of one of David’s descendants. Psalm 89:3-4 summarizes the Lord’s covenant with David in this way:

I have made a covenant with my chosen one, I have sworn to David my servant, “I will establish your line forever and make your throne firm through all generations.” (Psalm 89:3-4).

Now, it’s natural to wonder why the sons of David eventually lost control of the throne, if God had promised it to them. The answer is that the blessings God promised in this covenant were conditioned upon the obedience of each of David’s descendants. This conditionality is mentioned explicitly in 2 Chronicles 6:16, Psalm 89:30-32, and Psalm 132:12. So, when David’s descendants rebelled against the Lord, they lost their thrones. 
For instance, in 922 B.C., during the days of David’s grandson Rehoboam, ten tribes were stripped from David’s dynasty and given to Jeroboam. We read about this event in 1 Kings 11–12. The tribes that followed Jeroboam came to be known as the kingdom of Israel, and the remnant that followed Rehoboam came to be known as the kingdom of Judah.
Later, in 587 B.C., even the kingdom of Judah was stripped from David’s house, when his descendant Jeconiah was dethroned and his kingdom utterly fell to the Babylonians. 
Around this time, many prophets foretold that God would send a great “messiah” or “anointed one” in the future. He would be a great king, descended from David, who would restore and reunite the kingdoms of Israel and Judah.

In the Old Testament, the figure who became known as the Messiah was the king — was the king from David’s line. David was given a covenant by God, and in that covenant, he was promised that one day God would raise up a king who would have a special, unique “son of God” relationship — relationship with God, as his Son, who would reign forever on the throne of David, who would establish justice and righteousness. So really, when we refer to the Old Testament Messiah, we’re referring to a king — the ultimate king, the king who would bring God’s salvation and deliverance.

—	Dr. Mark L. Strauss

Many Old Testament prophets talked about the Messiah or Christ as a descendant of David who would return the exiles to the Promised Land and bring God’s greatest blessings to the restored nation. For example, we find these types of prophecies in Jeremiah 23:5-8, 30:8-9, and 33:14-17. We see them in Ezekiel 34:20-31, and 37:21-28. And we read them in Zechariah 12–13. As just one example, listen to Jeremiah 23:5-6:

“The days are coming,” declares the LORD, “when I will raise up to David a righteous Branch, a King who will reign wisely and do what is just and right in the land. In his days Judah will be saved and Israel will live in safety” (Jeremiah 23:5-6).

Through prophecies like this, the Old Testament encouraged God’s people to long for the Messiah — an anointed king in David’s line who would rescue them from their suffering and bring them into God’s glorious blessings.
With this understanding of the Old Testament background to the office of Messiah in mind, we are ready to explore how the fulfillment of this office in Jesus points to his humanity.


Fulfillment in Jesus
	
The New Testament speaks of Jesus as the Christ in over 500 places. So, it almost goes without saying that from a Christian point of view, he is the great Messiah that the Old Testament anticipated. But to remove all doubt, there are two passages in John’s gospel where Jesus is called “Messiah,” and where John explains that “Messiah” means the same thing as “Christ.” These passages are John 1:41, and John 4:25-26. Let’s look at just one of these to prove the point.
Listen to these words from Jesus’ conversation with the woman at the well in John 4:25-26:

The woman said, “I know that Messiah” (called Christ) “is coming. When he comes, he will explain everything to us.” Then Jesus declared, “I who speak to you am he” (John 4:25-26).

Here Jesus explicitly admitted to being the Messiah prophesied by the Old Testament. And John explained that the normal word for “messiah” in Greek was christos, here translated “Christ.” This tells us that whenever we see Jesus referred to as “Christ,” we should understand him to be the Messiah prophesied by the Old Testament.
But how does Jesus’ role as the Messiah, or Christ, prove that he is truly human? Why couldn’t God simply come to earth in his divine glory and save his people? Or why couldn’t he send an angel to lead his favored nation? 
Well, according to the prophecies of the Old Testament, the Messiah had to be human because he had to be a son of David. As we have seen, God had made a covenant with David specifying that one of his descendants would rule Israel forever. And of course, all of David’s descendants were human. 

God forms relationships with sinners through covenant. He does that voluntarily. He is not under any obligation to do so. The initiative is his. It’s a sovereign choice of God to enter into covenant with us through the mediation of his own Son. Once God enters into a covenant, he is then, of course, obligated to fulfill the terms of that covenant, whether those terms be for blessing or for cursing. He is not at liberty to break that covenant. 

—	Dr. Derek Thomas


As surprising as it may sound, God truly obligated himself according to his decree. Whenever he makes a covenant, he is bound to keep its terms. He chooses to obligate himself in this way as a means to accomplish his eternal will for his covenant people. But even though the covenant binds him, it’s still an expression of his free will. 

—	Dr. Paul Chang, translation

In the case of the covenant with David, God obligated himself to send a human Messiah to save his people. And that Messiah was Jesus.
A second reason is that only a human son of David could be an atoning sacrifice for his people. As we have seen, Hebrews 2:14-17 indicates that the Messiah had to be human. And beyond this, Isaiah 53 adds the requirement that atonement be made by a human son of David. A third reason the Messiah had to be human was that he had to be the second Adam. That is, he had to succeed where Adam had failed.
When God created humanity, he set up Adam as the head of the entire race, and he appointed humanity to transform the world into God’s kingdom. But Adam sinned, plunging humanity into sin and rendering us incapable of performing our appointed task. Genesis 1–3 records this story, and Romans 5:12-19 explains its deep significance. The historical books of the Old Testament, in turn, record how fallen humanity continually tried and failed to build God’s kingdom throughout the centuries.
Still, the Father’s requirements had not changed — human beings were still responsible to build the kingdom of God. So, eventually the Father sent his own Son to fix the problem. The Son came to build the kingdom for us. But in order to build it on our behalf — in order to take our place — he had to be human himself. Through his righteous life, atoning death, empowered resurrection and heavenly enthronement, Jesus succeeded where Adam and the rest of us had failed. He became humanity’s second Adam. And when we are united to Jesus by faith, his success becomes our success, and his power becomes our empowerment. We are restored to the dignified, important role of building God’s kingdom.
So far in our discussion of Jesus’ humanity, we have spoken of his various human experiences, as well as of the human office of Messiah or Christ. At this point, we are ready to talk about Jesus’ human nature and its relationship to his divine nature.

