NATURE

When we say that Jesus has a human nature, we mean that he possesses all the attributes and traits that are essential to being human — things like a physical human body and a rational human soul.
Throughout church history, many theological battles have been fought over the nature of Christ’s humanity. Was he fully human in all respects? Did he have a real flesh and blood body, or did he just appear to be human? Did he have a real human soul, or did his divine person inhabit an empty body? Questions like these may seem rather technical and mysterious, and perhaps even unimportant. But at times arguments over Christ’s human nature have threatened to divide the church. They have been the subject of many theological councils, and the stumbling block of numerous heretical sects. Even today false understandings of Christ’s humanity can undermine the gospel. So, it’s important for every Christian to understand at least the rudimentary aspects of Jesus’ human nature.
Faithful Christian theology has consistently maintained that Jesus is fully human in every respect: he has a body and a soul; he was subject to sickness, injury and death; he had normal physical limitations; and so on. 
But when we talk about Jesus in this way, the picture quickly becomes complicated because Jesus differs from other human beings in some important ways. For one thing, Jesus is a perfect human being, whereas the rest of us are flawed. And this results in some significant differences between us. For example, every other human being has sinned. We see this theme in 1 Kings 8:46, Psalm 130:3, Psalm 143:2, Romans 5:12, Galatians 3:22, and many other passages. As just one example, consider these words from Romans 3:10-12:

There is no one righteous, not even one; there is no one who understands, no one who seeks God. All have turned away, they have together become worthless; there is no one who does good, not even one (Romans 3:10-12).

But Jesus is different. He was born without sin, and lived a perfectly sinless life. The Bible specifically speaks of his sinlessness in passages like Hebrews 4:14-15, and 9:14. So, how do we reconcile this idea with the assertion that Jesus had a true and complete human nature? Well, the simple answer is that the commission of sin, and even the ability to sin, are not essential to being human. 
It’s true that in the very beginning God created humanity with the ability to sin. Adam and Eve proved this in Genesis 3 when they ate from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. But we have to admit that even before they sinned, they were still human. So, it is possible to have a human being that does not sin. And in fact, when we die and go to heaven, we will actually lose the ability to sin, as Hebrews 12:23 teaches. But we will still be entirely human. So, while sin characterizes us in this fallen world, it will not characterize us in the next. And therefore, sinfulness is not an essential attribute of humanity. This is why we say that Jesus’ human nature includes all the attributes and traits that are essential to being human.
Another thing that makes Jesus different is the fact that he is the only person that possesses two natures: a human nature and a divine nature. Every other human being has only one nature: a human nature. But Jesus is both God and man, being both fully human and fully divine at the same time. Now, the Bible does not explicitly say how Christ’s two natures are united in his person. And the difficulties involved in explaining this union led to many controversies in the early church. But eventually the church settled on language that affirmed both Christ’s one person and his two natures, without going beyond Scripture in its description of the details. 
The technical term we use to describe the existence of both a human and a divine nature in the person of Christ is “hypostatic union.” Although this may sound like a strange term to our modern ears, we can understand it when we think of how it was used in the early church. In the early church, “hypostasis” was one of the words that was commonly used to refer to what we call a person, especially a person of the Trinity.
For instance, in chapter 18 of his work On the Holy Spirit, the fourth-century church father Basil used the word hypostasis in this way:

There is one God and Father, one Only-begotten, and one Holy Ghost. We proclaim each of the hypostases singly.

Here, Basil meant the same thing that we would mean if we said “We proclaim each of the persons singly.” The doctrine of the hypostatic union then, deals with the union of a divine nature and a human nature within the one hypostasis or person of God the Son. Stated precisely, it says that:

Jesus is one person with two distinct natures (a divine nature and a human nature) with each nature retaining its own attributes.

God the Son has always possessed full divinity with all its attributes. And when he was conceived and born as a human being, he added to his person all the essential attributes of a human being, such as a body and soul. 
One place the New Testament talks about the hypostatic union is Philippians 2:5-7, where Paul wrote these words:

Christ Jesus … being in very nature God … made himself nothing, taking the very nature of a servant, being made in human likeness (Philippians 2:5-7).

Here Paul made it clear that Jesus existed as God and had a fully divine nature. Then, he became incarnate, adding a human nature to the divine nature he already possessed. Now, Paul’s statement that Jesus “made himself nothing,” or more literally “emptied himself,” has sometimes confused Christians.
Some have mistakenly thought that Jesus actually put aside his glory, or even his divine nature. But as we have seen in prior lessons, this is impossible. God’s nature is immutable. God can’t put aside any of his essential attributes, much less his entire nature. 
Fortunately, Paul made the meaning of this phrase very clear by explaining it with two participial phrases: taking the very nature of a servant and being made in human likeness. These phrases tell us how Jesus “became nothing” or “emptied himself.” Specifically, Jesus emptied himself not by losing his divine nature, but by taking on an additional nature — a human nature that did not replace but merely veiled his divine glory.
Perhaps the most famous statement explaining the hypostatic union was the creed of the ecumenical council that met in A.D. 451 in the city of Chalcedon, in northern Asia Minor. The Council of Chalcedon met to defend the traditional doctrines of the person and natures of Christ, and to deny several different heresies regarding these matters.
The statement the council produced is known by several names, including the Chalcedonian Creed or “Symbol,” and the Definition of Chalcedon. Listen to this excerpt from it:

Our Lord Jesus Christ [is] perfect in Godhead and also perfect in manhood; truly God and truly man, of a reasonable soul and body … in all things like unto us, without sin … to be acknowledged in two natures, inconfusedly, unchangeably, indivisibly, inseparably; the distinction of natures being by no means taken away by the union, but rather the property of each nature being preserved, and concurring in one person and one subsistence.

Much of the language of the Chalcedonian Creed is very technical. But we might summarize it in two points. On the one hand, Jesus has only one person. He does not have two persons or two minds, as if a human person hosted a divine person in his body. And he is not one person that is somehow a combination or hybrid of two distinct persons or minds, as if a divine person merged with a human person. He is and always has been the same eternal person known as the Son of God.
At the same time, Jesus has two distinct natures: a human nature and a divine nature. Both these natures are entire and whole, just as the nature of the Father is entirely divine, and the nature of human beings is entirely human. Jesus possesses every attribute that is essential to divinity and every attribute that is essential to humanity.
Moreover, Jesus’ two natures are distinct from each other. He does not have a hybrid nature that combines both divine and human attributes. Nor do his human attributes hinder his divine attributes, or his divine attributes enhance his human attributes. Each nature remains entirely unchanged.

What I think is so intriguing is the way the epistle to the Hebrews emphasizes how crucial it is that the mediator between God and man, the great high priest, be fully God and fully man. He’s eternally God, the Creator who sustains all things by the word of his power. He’s fully God. And then, Hebrews says, for our sake, because we need a high priest who is fully human, he takes to himself flesh and blood, just as we have. He is our brother. He can intercede for us from the standpoint of one who shares our human nature, who has endured every trial and temptation with absolute obedience, and who knows what it’s like to undergo human testing. So, we need a human high priest, a brother. We also need a divine high priest who lives forever to intercede for us. And we have that in the one person of Jesus Christ. 

—	Dr. Dennis E. Johnson

Christ’s humanity has many implications for the way we live as his followers. As Paul wrote in 1 Timothy 2:5, it means that we have an effective human mediator between us and God, so that through his death we can be forgiven and live as those fully reconciled to the Father. And as Paul taught in Romans 5:12-19, it means that as the second Adam, Jesus has constituted a new human race out of those who trust in him, restoring us to a position of honor and dignity within creation. Because of this, we now have the power to live in ways that please God, and to change the world to make it more like his heavenly kingdom. And on an individual basis, as we struggle with sin and suffering in our lives, we can approach the throne of grace with confidence, knowing that our fully human savior understands and sympathizes with our pains and weaknesses, making him eager to respond to us in ways that ease our suffering, build our character, and increase our eternal rewards. These are just a few of the countless ways that Christ’s full humanity impacts our lives.
So far in our lesson, we have explored both the divinity of Jesus Christ, and his humanity. At this point, we are ready to focus on the work of Christ mentioned in the Apostles’ Creed.



WORK
	
For the last few hundred years, it has been common for theologians to talk about the work of Jesus in terms of two ideas. First, there is his humiliation, in which he humbled himself by condescending to take on a frail human nature, and to suffer on earth in order to redeem fallen humanity. And second, there is his exaltation, in which God the Father unveiled Christ’s hidden divine glory, and heaped additional honor and praise on him. These categories are not explicitly mentioned in the Apostles’ Creed, but they are very helpful ways for us to think about the work of Jesus.
As we consider Jesus’ work in this lesson, we will turn first to his humiliation, those things that hid or veiled his glory. And second, we will consider his exaltation, the work that revealed his glory and that will result in further glory in the future. Let’s begin with Christ’s humiliation during his earthly ministry.


HUMILIATION

Jesus’ work of humiliation is mentioned in the following lines from the Apostles’ Creed:

[He] was conceived by the Holy Spirit, And born of the Virgin Mary. He suffered under Pontius Pilate, Was crucified, died, and was buried; He descended into hell. 
In each of these works, the Son of God caused his glory to be veiled and hidden from sight, and subjected himself to suffering and indignity. Because the Son’s divine nature is immutable, it could not be humiliated. So, his humiliation was limited to his human nature. Nevertheless, because his human nature is perfectly united to his person, his divine person fully experienced the humiliation.
In this lesson, we will summarize Jesus’ works of humiliation under two headings: his incarnation and his passion. Let’s begin by looking at his incarnation, when he came to earth as a human being.


Incarnation

The theological term “incarnation” refers to Jesus permanently taking on a human nature. Literally, the word “incarnation” refers to “taking on flesh,” that is, a human body. But as we have seen, Christian theology has regularly maintained that Jesus also took on a human soul. So, when we speak of the incarnation in theology, we are generally referring to Jesus’ entire human nature. Scripture speaks of the incarnation of Christ in many places, such as John 1:1, 14; Philippians 2:6-7; and Hebrews 2:14-17.
John 1:1, 14 is probably the source of the technical term “incarnation.” Listen to what John wrote there:

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God… The Word became flesh and made his dwelling among us (John 1:1, 14).

Notice that John said the Son of God “became flesh” — the literal meaning of incarnation. His point was that Jesus took a real human nature, including a real human body.
In the Apostles’ Creed, the works associated with Jesus’ incarnation are his conception and birth. We previously spoke of these events in terms of Jesus’ generation, and demonstrated that they prove his humanity. At this point, we want to consider these same events again, but from the perspective of Jesus’ work as Messiah. Why was the incarnation necessary? What did Jesus accomplish by it?
Scripture teaches that Jesus’ work of incarnation accomplished at least three things: First, it gave God the Son the legal right to be the Davidic king. Second, it gave him the mercy and sympathy he needed in order to be an effective high priest. And third, the incarnation was necessary in order for Jesus to become an atoning sacrifice for sin. Let’s briefly consider each of these points, beginning with the fact that the Davidic king had to be a human being.
We have already mentioned that the messiah had to be human in order for God to keep the promises he made to David. So, at this point, we want to consider how Jesus’ work of incarnation gave him the right to David’s throne. The problem before us is that the legal right to inherit David’s throne could only be inherited by sons. So, Jesus could only claim David’s throne if he had a human father who descended from David. 
To solve this problem, Jesus became incarnate through the Virgin Mary, who was betrothed to Joseph. And as we see in Jesus genealogies in Matthew 1 and Luke 3, Joseph was a direct legal descendant of David. So, when Joseph married Mary and adopted Jesus, Jesus obtained the legal genealogy of Joseph, and with it the right to be the messianic king. 
Besides giving God the Son the legal right to be the Davidic king, the incarnation gave the him the mercy and sympathy he needed in order to be an effective high priest on behalf of his people. 

The Bible tells us that Jesus’ incarnation made him a high priest who is able to be touched with the feeling of our infirmities. And that means that he is a more effective high priest than he would have been or could have been had he not known the fullness of what it is to be human and experience that with and for us. There are a variety of ways that that’s manifested. One is that Jesus in his own life and experience dealt with and encountered the same range of human problems in the fallen world that we do, that God in the flesh knows the same kind of heartaches and sorrows and disappointments and betrayals and wounds that anyone who lives in this fallen world experiences. This is not something theoretical to him, this is not something that he stood off in the deep bowels of space, in the dusty past of eternity and speculated about. It’s something that he came into the world in our poor flesh, in our poor blood and experienced himself. 

—	Dr. J Ligon Duncan III

The author of Hebrews discussed this aspect of the incarnation in Hebrews 2:17-18. Listen to what he wrote there:

[Jesus] had to be made like his brothers in every way, in order that he might become a merciful and faithful high priest in service to God … Because he himself suffered when he was tempted, he is able to help those who are being tempted (Hebrews 2:17-18).

In addition to giving Jesus the right to be the Davidic king and the experience to be an effective high priest, the incarnation enabled Jesus to become an atoning sacrifice for the sins of his people. 
As we saw earlier in this lesson, Jesus had to be human in order to die in place of his people. But why was his humanity so essential to the atonement? The answer is that God had imposed human death as the penalty for human sin. Scripture teaches this in Genesis 2:17, Romans 5:12 and 6:23, James 1:15, and many other places. Beginning with Adam, sin spread to the entire human race, and it brought the legal penalty of human death. This is why only a real, flesh-and-blood human death could satisfy God’s requirement.
Listen to the way Paul explained the connection between Jesus’ humanity and our salvation in Romans 5:15-19:

If the many died by the trespass of the one man, how much more did God's grace and the gift that came by the grace of the one man, Jesus Christ, overflow to the many! … For if, by the trespass of the one man, death reigned through that one man, how much more will those who receive God's abundant provision of grace and of the gift of righteousness reign in life through the one man, Jesus Christ… For just as through the disobedience of the one man the many were made sinners, so also through the obedience of the one man the many will be made righteous (Romans 5:15-19).

Over and over again, Paul emphasized that Jesus’ human righteousness was the counterpart and cure to Adam’s human sin. Paul made it abundantly clear that Jesus had to be human in order to fix what Adam had broken. He had to be human in order to take the penalty that God imposed on humanity, and in order to spread his righteousness to other human beings.

Sometimes we as conservative, as evangelical Christians, so emphasize the deity of Christ that we forget that it’s really his humanity that saves us. Because Jesus became a true human being, he could suffer and die for us, for our sins. So, Jesus’ humanity is essential to our salvation. 

—	Dr. Mark L. Strauss

With this understanding of Jesus’ incarnation in mind, let’s explore his passion, the second aspect of his work of humiliation mentioned in the Apostles’ Creed.


Passion

The theological term “passion” comes from the Greek verb pascho, meaning “suffer.” It refers to Jesus’ suffering and death, beginning the night of his arrest. Jesus’ passion is mentioned in these lines of the Apostles’ Creed.

He suffered under Pontius Pilate, Was crucified, died, and was buried; He descended into hell. 
Most Christians are familiar with the story of Jesus arrest, suffering and crucifixion. So rather than explore those details here, we’ll focus on the reason that Jesus subjected himself to these events. 
With regard to Jesus’ suffering, Scripture explains that it was necessary to teach Jesus obedience, and to commend him to God the Father. As we read in Hebrews 5:8:

[Jesus] learned obedience from what he suffered (Hebrews 5:8).

And as Peter wrote in 1 Peter 2:20-21:

If you suffer for doing good and you endure it, this is commendable before God. To this you were called, because Christ suffered for you, leaving you an example, that you should follow in his steps (1 Peter 2:20-21).

Through his suffering, Christ fulfilled the Father’s will, and thereby commended himself to the Father. By perfectly obeying the Father, he earned an eternal reward — a reward that he now graciously shares with us. 
But Christ’s treatment under Pilate did not end with suffering; it carried through to his death by crucifixion. This is perhaps the best-known aspect of Christ’s work of humiliation, and for good reason: it was his death that atoned for our sin and accomplished our salvation.

The death of the Lord Jesus for sin (that’s how it’s presented all the way through the New Testament) worked, if one can put it this way, because he became our penal substitute. “Substitute” means he took our place, and “penal” points to the fact that he took our place in enduring the judgment, the penalty, which all of us had merited by our own transgressions of God’s law — the penalty, that is, with which God had threatened us for breaking his law. God’s nature is such, I mean this is his holiness in reality, his nature is such that where there has been sin, there has to be retribution. And the wonderful, wise, loving way of salvation that God planned was to divert the penalty from our guilty shoulders, if I can put it that way, onto the innocent, flawless shoulders of his incarnate Son, who thus fulfills the pattern of the flawless animal sacrifice that was demanded all through the Old Testament. 

—	Dr. J. I. Packer

The apostle Paul often described the crucifixion as the very heart of the gospel. We see this in places like Romans 6:6, 1 Corinthians 1:17-18, Galatians 6:14, and Colossians 1:20. As just one example, listen to his words in Galatians 2:20-21:

I have been crucified with Christ and I no longer live, but Christ lives in me. The life I live in the body, I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me. I do not set aside the grace of God, for if righteousness could be gained through the law, Christ died for nothing! (Galatians 2:20-21).

Christ’s death was the central work that accomplished our salvation. And for this reason, it has been the central fact of gospel presentations throughout history.
After Jesus’ crucifixion, his body was buried in a tomb, where it remained lifeless for three days. Being fully human, Jesus underwent the normal human experience of death. The Apostles’ Creed records this fact in the words he descended into hell. At this time, Jesus’ body remained in the tomb while his soul descended to the place of the dead.
Now, we should mention that modern theologians are not entirely agreed over the meaning of the phrase “he descended into hell.” Many churches today interpret this line to mean only that Jesus was buried. But it seems clear that this is not the meaning the Apostles’ Creed itself intended. For one thing, the creed mentions both that Jesus was buried, and that he descended into hell. To all appearances, these phrases are separate and consecutive items in the historical record. For another thing, while it is true that the phrase “hell” can simply mean “under the ground,” its use in Scripture and in the writings of the early church almost always refers to the underworld that contains the souls of the dead. We might think of this as its default meaning in the early church — the meaning ancient Christians usually had in mind when they used the word “hell.”
For these reasons, it’s best to conclude that the Apostles’ Creed intended to teach that Jesus’ soul really descended into the underworld between the time of his death and resurrection. But what was the nature of this hell?
In the ancient world, the universe was often described in the language of a vertical structure. The earth, where human beings lived, was in the middle. Heaven, the realm of God and his angels, was spoken of as being in the sky. And beneath the earth was a shadowy underworld where all the souls of the dead resided. In the Hebrew Old Testament, it was most commonly called sheol; in the Greek New Testament and in Greek translations of the Old Testament, it was normally called hades. 
In the Old Testament, the souls of both the good and the wicked were said to reside there as they awaited the final judgment. In the New Testament, however, hades usually refers to the abode of the wicked souls, as in Luke 10:15. Nevertheless, at least before Jesus’ resurrection, the New Testament also confirms that the souls of the righteous were in hades. Most notably, Acts 2:27-29 speaks of the righteous man king David as being in hades.
Now, this does not mean that everyone in hades or hell was treated equally. Jesus’ parable of Lazarus and the Rich Man, found in Luke 16:19-31, indicates that a great gulf divided the souls of the wicked from the souls of the righteous. And while the wicked suffered in torment, the righteous were comforted. In this parable, Abraham resided in the place of comfort. For this reason, theologians have often called this part of hades “Abraham’s Side” or more literally “Abraham’s Bosom.” 
The church father Tertullian, who wrote in the early third century, expressed the common belief in this division of hades. Listen to what he wrote in chapter 17 of his work On the Resurrection of the Flesh:

That souls are even now susceptible of torment and of blessing in Hades … is proved by the case of Lazarus.

And the church father Ignatius, writing in A.D. 107, had this to say in his Epistle to the Trallians:

By those under the earth, [I mean] the multitude that arose along with the Lord. For says the Scripture, “Many bodies of the saints that slept arose,” their graves being opened. He descended, indeed, into Hades alone, but He arose accompanied by a multitude; and rent asunder that means of separation which had existed from the beginning of the world.

So, when the creed says that Jesus descended into hell, the most likely meaning is that his human soul descended to the place of the departed spirits. Specifically, he descended to the region reserved for the souls of the righteous, and not to the region where the wicked are tormented. Jesus’ stay in this part of hell was a necessary part of his work because it subjected his soul to the judicial punishment of true human death.
Jesus’ passion shows us what it means to be truly human in a fallen world. If even our perfect Lord had to suffer as he opposed and remedied sin, then surely we who are imperfect will also suffer. In fact, as Paul wrote in 2 Timothy 3:12, suffering is guaranteed for everyone who seeks to live a godly life. But Scripture also teaches that when we suffer, Christ suffers. This means that he is sympathetic to our pain, and eager to comfort us. And as Paul taught in Colossians 1:24, eventually Christ’s suffering through us will be complete. And when that happens, he will return in glory and we will receive our eternal inheritances. Our suffering is not without purpose; it is a means God is using to bring about the full restoration of all creation.
Now that we have looked at Jesus’ work of humiliation, we should consider his work of exaltation, when his divine glory was revealed once again.

