#### Old Testament

Everyone familiar with the Bible knows that God tested Adam as God’s covenant representative through his directives in the Garden of Eden. And we also know that God called for the loyalty of his covenant people in Adam: the entire human race. 
Noah also was tested by God’s directives as his covenant representative both before and after the flood. And the Scriptures indicate that God continued to test the hearts of his covenant people in Noah — again, the entire human race. 
The stories of Abraham’s life illustrate how God tested the patriarch’s loyalty in a number of ways as his covenant representative. As just one example, Genesis 22:1-19 tells us explicitly that God tested Abraham when he commanded him to sacrifice his son Isaac. In Genesis 22:12, the angel of the Lord said to Abraham: 

> Now I know that you fear God, because you have not withheld from me your son, your only son (Genesis 22:12).

We can see in this passage why God commanded Abraham. He tested him to prove the true condition of his heart. 
In a similar way, the Scriptures teach that God tested the loyalty of his covenant people in Abraham: the people of Israel and Gentiles adopted into Israel. 
Moses was tested by God’s commands throughout his life as the covenant representative of Israel. And God explicitly explained that he gave his covenant people of Israel the Law to test them. Listen to Deuteronomy 8:2 where Moses told the people:

> The Lord your God led you all the way in the desert these forty years, to humble you and to test you in order to know what was in your heart, whether or not you would keep his commands (Deuteronomy 8:2). 

In much the same way, the stories of David’s life indicate that God tested David’s loyalty as the royal covenant representative of Israel. And as the rest of the Old Testament illustrates repeatedly, God continued to test his covenant people, the sons of David and the nation of Israel, throughout their generations. 
Having mentioned God’s tests of loyalty in Old Testament covenants, now let’s explore the way God tests his people’s loyalty in the new covenant. 

#### New Covenant

Now, as we’ve seen, God’s grace has been poured out in the new covenant as never before in biblical history. Yet, it’s also apparent that the New Testament has countless commands and directives from God. Why is this true? Well, just as in the Old Testament covenants, the new covenant also requires tests of loyalty. 
For this reason, the New Testament gives a great deal of attention to Christ’s loyalty as the new covenant representative. It tells us that during the inauguration of the kingdom, Jesus passed every test of loyalty that God required of him. In Hebrews 4:15 we read:

> We have one who has been tempted in every way, just as we are — yet was without sin (Hebrews 4:15).
 
And listen to Philippians 2:8 where Paul referred to Christ’s remarkable obedience: 

> Being found in appearance as a man, he humbled himself and became obedient to death — even death on a cross! (Philippians 2:8). 

In New Testament theology, the height of Jesus’ loyal service to God was his voluntary death on the cross. But why was this act of obedience so significant? 
From the time sin entered the world, God made temporary provisions for the sins of his covenant people through the blood of animal sacrifices. But as Hebrews 10:1-14 teaches, these sacrifices were unable to secure the final, permanent forgiveness of God’s victorious kingdom. And so, as Israel’s exile approached, God revealed in Isaiah 53:1-12, that he required the voluntary death of the servant of the Lord, the Messiah, as atonement for the sins of his people. By his death, the royal covenant representative would bring God’s people into the glories of his eternal victorious kingdom. Jesus fulfilled this role in the inauguration when he voluntarily submitted to death on the cross. We see this in passages like Matthew 8:17; Acts 8:32-33; Romans 6:10; and 1 Peter 2:22-25. By passing this test of loyalty as the new covenant representative, Jesus provided permanent atonement and eternal forgiveness to all who believe in him. 
In addition to Jesus’ death on the cross, passages like Hebrews 8:1-2 also point out that Christ, as the son of David, serves obediently in heaven throughout the continuation of his kingdom. And 1 Corinthians 15:24 teaches that when Christ returns in glory at the consummation, he will hand the kingdom to God the Father as an act of humble service. 
Now, as much as New Testament theology emphasizes Christ’s perfect loyalty as the new covenant representative, it also stresses that tests of loyalty are still in effect for the church, the people of the new covenant. 
Once again, it helps to understand tests of loyalty for the church in terms of the church’s union with Christ. On the one side, the church is “in Christ” in the sense that we’re identified with him before God in his heavenly court. And according to 1 Timothy 3:16, Christ was the one who passed the test of loyalty perfectly and was vindicated when the Holy Spirit raised him from the dead. For this reason, as passages like Romans 4:23-25 teach, this legal vindication of Christ in the court of heaven is imputed to all who have saving faith in him. In Christ, true believers are judged as those who have passed the test because Christ has passed the test on our behalf. This wondrous truth about Christ in God’s heavenly court is the basis for the New Testament theological perspective that protestant theologians have called “sola fide,” or justification by faith alone.
On the other side, however, union with Christ also refers to the day-to-day experience of “Christ in us.” While the church still exists on earth prior to Christ’s return in glory, people within the church experience tests of loyalty that prove the condition of their hearts. And Christ’s Spirit works within true believers to make us holy. This side of our union with Christ corresponds to the traditional protestant doctrine of sanctification, or the progressive pursuit of holiness. And Scripture teaches that testing is the way God moves us forward in sanctification. As James 1:2-3 puts it:

> Consider it pure joy, my brothers, whenever you face trials of many kinds, because you know that the testing of your faith develops perseverance (James 1:2-3).

Now, once again, we must remember that during the inauguration and continuation of Christ’s kingdom, the visible church, consists of both false believers and true believers. And it’s through the test of loyalty that both groups reveal whether or not they have saving faith. False believers fail the test of loyalty and turn from serving Christ. By contrast, true believers, although not perfect in this life, will persevere in their loyalty to Christ through the power of the Spirit. As we read in 1 John 2:19 regarding false believers:

> They went out from us, but they did not really belong to us. For if they had belonged to us, they would have remained with us; but their going showed that none of them belonged to us (1 John 2:19). 

As this passage indicates, New Testament theology contains many commands from God as tests of loyalty to prove those who really belong to the body of true believers. 

> On the night he was betrayed, Jesus Christ launched a new covenant. And like all covenants, this one is one that involves reciprocating commitments and reciprocal obligations. And one of our chief commitments in this wonderful covenant is a commitment to the lordship of Jesus Christ, to obedience to his will and his ways, to surrender up our swords to his true lordship, and to live that out in authentic ways, both in the disposition of our hearts and our willingness to follow the heart of God into the world. But one of the things that’s certainly necessary to add here is that the fulfillment of our covenant obligations today are fulfillments we live out in the power and presence of the Holy Spirit. And the Holy Spirit alters the disposition of that obedience and upgrades it well above grinding duty so that it becomes, in the language of Scripture, this covenant becomes a covenant of reciprocating delight. The one who looks over us delights in us and we in him. And it gives you some idea of why the apostle could say that the kingdom of God is not grinding duty, but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit. Some of the greatest saints have told us that this obligation that exists to be faithful and loyal to our Lord is one that we fulfill not reluctantly, but eagerly, and with all of our hearts because he has won us over. And we find him and his ways delightful.
— Dr. Glen G. Scorgie 

Now that we’ve seen the dynamics of interaction in the new covenant in relation to God’s divine benevolence and tests of loyalty, we should turn to a third element. Let’s examine the consequences of blessings and curses for obedience and disobedience. 

### CONSEQUENCES

We’ll look at the consequences for obedience and disobedience in covenant with God along the lines of our earlier discussions. We’ll briefly survey the Old Testament covenants and then turn to the new covenant. Let’s first see the consequences of blessings and curses in the Old Testament covenants. 

#### Old Testament

Prior to the new covenant, the consequences of both blessings and curses were crucial dimensions of God’s interactions with his covenant representatives, and with his covenant people as a whole. Now, as we’ve already mentioned, God often implemented the terms of his covenants in ways that were beyond human understanding. So, in Scripture God often hastened, increased, lessened, delayed and even cancelled the blessings and curses of his covenants at times in ways that were beyond human comprehension. But he always did so according to his perfect wisdom and goodness. 
In the covenant of foundations, God cursed Adam, his covenant representative, with suffering and death in response to his disobedience. But, we also see God’s blessings to Adam. In Genesis 3:15, God promised humanity’s victory over the seed of the serpent. And both this curse of death and hope of victory were passed on, as God saw fit, to the covenant people Adam represented, the human race. 
In the covenant of nature’s stability, the covenant representative, Noah, received blessings for his faithful service. But he also continued to face curses, such as troubles in his family after the flood. Similar blessings and curses came to future generations of humanity, the covenant people Noah represented. 
In the covenant of Israel’s election, Abraham also received the consequences of blessings and curses as God’s covenant representative. These consequences were passed down to the covenant people of Israel and those adopted into Israel in subsequent generations.
In a similar way, in the covenant of law, Moses received God’s blessings and curses in his life as the covenant representative. Additionally, Moses’ law spelled out many specific blessings and curses that would come to the covenant people of Israel and Gentiles adopted into Israel.
In the covenant of kingship, David himself, as the covenant representative, received the consequences of blessings and curses as he was faithful and unfaithful. The same was true for the covenant people he represented, his royal descendants and the people of Israel and Gentiles adopted into Israel.
We’ve touched briefly on the consequences of blessings and curses in Old Testament covenants. These set the stage for what New Testament authors taught about the consequences of obedience and disobedience associated with the new covenant in Christ. 

#### New Covenant

New Testament theology emphasizes that Christ, as the representative of the new covenant, experienced both God’s curses and God’s blessings. As Paul pointed out in Galatians 3:13, Jesus endured the curse of God for the sins of all who believe in him as he suffered death on the cross. 
Now, Jesus didn’t come under God’s curses because of his own personal failures. He had no personal sins. But in fulfillment of Isaiah 53:1-12, he bore the judgment of God as an innocent royal substitute for the people of God in every age. By contrast, however, because of his own personal righteousness, Christ also received God’s blessings. Jesus is the only human being who served God perfectly and deserved the reward of God’s eternal blessings. 
Listen to the connection between Christ’s obedience and God’s blessing in Philippians 2:8-9:

> [Christ] became obedient to death — even death on a cross! Therefore God exalted him to the highest place and gave him the name that is above every name (Philippians 2:8-9). 

In New Testament theology, Jesus’ resurrection and ascension at the inauguration of the kingdom were the just reward for his perfect obedience to God. Jesus enjoys the blessing of God throughout the continuation of his kingdom as he reigns over all of creation at the right hand of the Father. And he will be blessed even more at the consummation of his kingdom when he receives his eternal inheritance of ruling over the new creation. 
Now, as much as New Testament theology praises Jesus for gaining the blessing of ruling over all creation, we know that the consequences of the new covenant also impact the church, the people of the new covenant.
Once again, the New Testament doctrine of union with Christ points out two sides of this reality. On the one side, because we are “in Christ,” every eternal blessing of God has already been assigned to true believers. True believers can rest confidently in the fact that they will never experience the eternal curse of God. Their eternal blessings are secure because Christ is their covenant representative.
Paul had this concept in mind when he wrote his well-known doxology in Ephesians 1:3:

> Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us in the heavenly realms with every spiritual blessing in Christ (Ephesians 1:3).

Because we are identified with Christ in heaven, true believers have already received “every spiritual blessing.” Just as Christ bore the eternal curses of God on our behalf, he also received the reward of eternal blessings from the Father on our behalf. 
On the other side, however, our union with Christ means that Christ is in us. That is to say, he is at work in true believers so that they experience the consequences of obedience and disobedience in their daily lives. 
Now, once again, we must remember that until Christ returns in glory, the visible church consists of both false believers and true believers. And New Testament theology explains how the consequences of blessings and curses, in this life and in eternity, apply to both of these groups. 
Passages like Luke 12:45-46 and Romans 2:4-5 explain that, as false believers continue to rebel against God, the blessings they receive in this life increase God’s eternal curses against them at the final judgment. And the hardships and curses they endure in this life are but foretastes of the eternal curses they will receive when Christ returns. 
By contrast, true believers also receive both blessings and curses in this life. But the blessings that true believers receive in this life are foretastes of the eternal blessings that will come at the consummation of the kingdom. And for true believers, as passages like Hebrews 12:1-11 tell us, temporary hardships, or curses, are God’s loving, fatherly discipline. These difficulties sanctify us and increase the eternal blessings we’ll receive when Christ returns. As we read in Revelation 21:6-8, God says:

> To the thirsty I will give water without cost from the spring of the water of life. Those who are victorious will inherit all this, and I will be their God and they will be my children. But the cowardly, the unbelieving, the vile, the murderers, the sexually immoral, those who practice magic arts, the idolaters and all liars — they will be consigned to the fiery lake of burning sulfur (Revelation 21:6-8).

On that day, false believers in the new covenant church will be condemned to eternal judgment. But true believers will receive their eternal inheritance in the glorious new creation.

> If we want to see the blessings that God’s people receive after final judgment, we would go to Revelation 21 and 22, this amazing image of the new creation at the end of the world. And I love this description of the new creation in Revelation 21 and 22, because it’s not just a recapitulation of Genesis, of the Garden, it’s not just a return to the Garden. It’s really an escalation of the Garden. It’s dynamic. It’s better than Eden was. So, in Eden, Adam and Eve had a responsibility to rule under God, to tend the Garden and steward the earth. In the new creation we will too, and that’s our blessing. But we will never sin. Adam and Eve had the potential to sin. In the new creation, God’s people will never fall away. In Eden, Jesus wasn’t there, wasn’t there physically, bodily. In the new creation Jesus will be. So, the blessing that we inherit as people of God, people of the new covenant is really a new creation that’s better than anything the world has ever known.
— Dr. Stephen E. Witmer

## CONCLUSION
 
In this lesson on the new covenant in Christ, we’ve considered God’s kingdom administration and seen how God administered his kingdom through his covenant representatives, and how he established appropriate policies as his covenants developed organically. We’ve also explored how the dynamics of interaction between God and his covenant people involved his divine benevolence, his tests of loyalty, and the consequences for obedience and disobedience.
As we seek to understand the New Testament more fully, we must keep in mind that the new covenant in Christ wasn’t just one small part of New Testament theology. As the last of God’s covenants with his people, the new covenant deeply influenced everything New Testament authors wrote. God made a solemn pact with his people in Christ through the new covenant. And the more we understand about this new covenant, the better we will be able to see the most important features of New Testament theology.

Dr. Simon Vibert (Host) is Vice Principal of Wycliffe Hall of the University of Oxford where he also serves as Director of the School of Preaching. Dr. Vibert received his Th.M. from Glasgow University, his D.Min. from Reformed Theological Seminary, and his Postgraduate Diploma in Learning and Teaching in Higher Education from the University of Oxford. He is a Trustee of Latimer Trust, a member of the Church of England Evangelical Council, and served as Chairman of the Fellowship of Word and Spirit. Dr. Vibert also served for 8 years as Vicar of St. Luke's Church Wimbledon Park. He has produced numerous books and theological articles, including Excellence in Preaching: Learning from the Best (IVP, 2011); Stress: The Path to Peace (Inter-Varsity Press, 2014); and Lives Jesus Changed (Christian Focus Publications, 2010).


Dr. Constantine R. Campbell is Associate Professor of New Testament at Trinity Evangelical Divinity School.

Dr. Joel C. Hunter is Senior Pastor of Northland, A Church Distributed in Longwood, FL.

Mr. Bradley T. Johnson is Pastor of Wesley Chapel United Methodist Church and Adjunct Professor at Asbury Theological Seminary.

Dr. Daniel L. Kim is Assistant Professor of Old Testament at Covenant Theological Seminary.

Dr. Sean McDonough is Professor of New Testament at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary.

Dr. Alvin Padilla is Vice President of Academic Affairs at Western Theological Seminary.

Dr. Glen G. Scorgie is Professor of Theology at Bethel Seminary, San Diego.

Dr. Stephen J. Wellum is Professor of Christian Theology at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.

Dr. Stephen E. Witmer is Adjunct Professor of New Testament at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary and Lead Pastor of Pepperell Christian Fellowship in Pepperell, MA.
 
GLOSSARY
 
 
Abraham – Old Testament patriarch, son of Terah, father of the nation of Israel with whom God made a covenant in Genesis 15 and 17 promising innumerable descendants and a special land

Adam – The first man; husband of Eve; man with whom God made the covenant of foundations in which humanity was to fill and subdue the earth

berit/berith – Hebrew term (transliteration) most commonly translated "covenant"

christocentric – Centered on the person and work of Christ 

common grace – God's benevolence shown to all people

consummation – Third and final stage of inaugurated eschatology when Christ will return and fulfill God's ultimate purpose for all of history

continuation – Second or middle stage of inaugurated eschatology; the period of the kingdom of God after Christ's first advent but before the final victory

covenant – A binding legal agreement made either between two people or groups of people, or between God and a person or group of people 

covenant of foundations – God's covenant with Adam that emphasized the goals of God's kingdom and the role of human beings in his kingdom

covenant of fulfillment – God's covenant with his people in Christ that was designed to reverse the failures of the past and fulfill God's kingdom purposes; also called the "new covenant"

covenant of Israel's election – God's covenant with Abraham that assured the privileges and responsibilities of Israel as God's chosen people; sometimes called the covenant of promise

covenant of kingship – God's covenant with David that established Israel as a kingdom and emphasized that David's royal dynasty would endure and his descendant would sit on the throne and reign forever

covenant of law – God's covenant with Moses that set God's law before the tribes of Israel as a unified nation

covenant of stability – God's covenant with Noah that assured nature's stability
 
David – Second Old Testament king of Israel who received the promise that his descendant would sit on the throne and reign forever

diatheke – Greek term (transliteration) for "covenant"

inauguration – First stage in inaugurated eschatology; refers to Christ's first coming and the ministries of his apostles and prophets

justification – Initial declaration of righteousness when a believer is acquitted of the guilt of sin and is credited with the righteousness of Christ

Moses – Old Testament prophet and deliverer who led the Israelites out of Egypt; man with whom God made a national "covenant of law" and who administered the Ten Commandments and the Book of the Covenant to the Israelites; also appeared with Elijah at Jesus' transfiguration
 
national covenant(s) – A covenant made with an individual who represented the nation of Israel (e.g., Abraham, Moses, and David)

new covenant – The covenant of fulfillment in Christ; first mentioned in Jeremiah 31:31

Noah – Man who, under God’s direction, built an ark and survived the Flood; individual with whom God made a universal covenant that promised the enduring stability of nature

sanctification – The act of making people and things holy

saving grace – The blessings of salvation applied to true believers by the Holy Spirit 

Septuagint – Greek translation of the Old Testament
 
sola fide – Latin phrase meaning "faith alone"; the belief that justification is by faith alone and not by works; one of the basic principles of the Reformation

suzerain – A powerful emperor or king that ruled over smaller nations; the more powerful party of a covenant, the one to whom it was necessary to submit

suzerain-vassal treaty – A covenant arrangement made between a conquering emperor and a lesser ruler

universal covenant(s) – A covenant made with an individual who represented all of mankind (e.g., Adam and Noah)

vassal – A king or nation that must submit to a more powerful emperor or king (suzerain)
