## HISTORY

As we survey the history of the Apostles’ Creed, we will focus on two matters. On the one hand, we will look at the development of the creed, considering things like its authorship and date of composition. And on the other hand, we will look at the purpose of the creed, the reason the church thought it was important to create and to use it. We’ll turn first to historical development of the Apostles’ Creed.


### DEVELOPMENT

It was once believed and taught that the Apostles’ Creed was written in the first century by the twelve apostles themselves. It was even said that each apostle contributed one of the creed’s twelve distinct theological statements. However, there is virtually no evidence that this took place, or even that any apostles were directly involved in the writing of the creed. But if the apostles didn’t write the creed, who did? 

> The question of who wrote the Apostles’ Creed is an open one because we do not have an author signed up for it. Almost certainly though these questions are questions that were asked of baptismal candidates going back perhaps as far back as 40 or 50 years after Christ. So, a person would be asked, do you believe in God the Father, maker of heaven and earth? And we know this because a number of people talking about their baptismal experience will refer to various of these questions. And by 200 A.D., Tertullius refers to what is called the Old Roman Creed which is almost identical to the Apostles’ Creed and he refers to it in terms of those baptismal questions, “Do you believe…?” “Do you believe…?” … The first reference to the Apostles’ Creed, per se, is by a man named Rufinus in 390 A.D., and he relates the story that each of the twelve apostles, including Matthias who replaced Judas, gave one of the affirmations in the creed. There really is no proof for that theory, but the idea that in fact, these affirmations go all the way back to the apostles certainly has good basis. 
> 
> —	Dr. John Oswalt


In the writings of early Christians, there are many lists of essential doctrines that resemble the Apostles’ Creed. On the one hand, there are rules of faith that catalog and explain fundamental beliefs in some detail. The writings of the early church fathers indicate that written rules of faith summarized the beliefs and practices of the churches that produced them. For example, Origen included a rule of faith in the beginning of his work, On First Principles, and Irenaeus included one in book 1, chapter 10 of his famous work Against Heresies. Rules of faith like these were intended to preserve the teachings of the church, and were used to train its people — especially its leaders. Often, these rules varied from congregation to congregation. Generally speaking, they included affirmations of important doctrines, as well as moral teachings and traditions. 
On the other hand, some ancient doctrinal lists are in the form of creeds. These were short lists that summarized the doctrinal portions of the church’s rule of faith, especially its most critical beliefs. These were often recited in liturgical settings, such as baptisms. In the first and second centuries, it may have been the case that each local congregation had its own creed, or way of summarizing essential biblical truth. But by the third or fourth century, some creeds were rising to greater prominence and being used in multiple churches. 
One ancient creed that rose to prominence in this manner was the creed from the church in Rome, often called the Roman Creed. This creed is so similar to the Apostles’ Creed that many scholars believe the Apostles’ Creed to be simply a later version of the Roman Creed. But regardless of its precise origins, what is beyond question is that the Apostles’ Creed eventually came into widespread use, especially in Western churches. In the early centuries, its precise wording varied somewhat from church to church. But in the eighth century the wording was generally standardized into the form that we recognize and use today.
With this understanding of the historical development of the creed in mind, we should look at the purpose behind the creation and use of the Apostles’ Creed.


### PURPOSE

In our day, many Christians are suspicious of creeds, and it isn’t difficult to understand why. Although very few people would outspokenly claim that a creed has the same authority as Scripture, sometimes well-meaning Christians treat certain creeds if they were equal to the Bible itself. But no creed should ever be elevated to this level in theory or in practice. 
The Bible is our only inspired, infallible rule of faith and practice. Creeds, on the other hand, are fallible teaching tools that summarize our understanding of Scripture. And as we are about to see, the Apostles’ Creed was created to help Christians learn and remain true to the teachings of the Bible.
We will investigate the purpose of the Apostles’ Creed in three steps. First, we will look at Scripture as the original repository of true doctrine. Second, we will look at the churches’ traditional teachings as affirmations of Scripture. And third, we will see that the Apostles’ Creed was intended to summarize the churches’ traditional understandings of Scripture. Let’s begin with the fact that dedicated Christians have always affirmed that Scripture is the basis of our doctrine.

#### Scripture

Listen to the words of the early church father Origen in the Preface to his work On First Principles, written in the early third century:

> All who believe … derive the knowledge which incites men to a good and happy life from no other source than from the very words and teachings of Christ. And by the words of Christ, we do not mean those only which He spoke when He became man … for before that time, Christ, the Word of God, was in Moses and the prophets… Moreover … after His ascension into heaven He spoke in His apostles.

Origen taught that Scripture in all its parts was the word of Christ, and that it was the source of all true doctrine. And listen to the words of the early third-century bishop Hippolytus, in section 9 of his work Against the Heresy of One Noetus:

> There is, brethren, one God, the knowledge of whom we gain from the Holy Scriptures, and from no other source.

The early churches believed that the whole Bible was Christ’s word, given to believers by the apostles. In this regard, they affirmed the concept that theologians often call sola Scriptura or Scripture alone. This is the perspective that Scripture is the only infallible rule of faith, and the final arbiter in any theological controversy. 
We find a clear example of this in the writings of Basil, who was elected bishop of Caesarea in A.D. 370. Basil was a strong defender of the traditions or customs of the church, and often expressed his beliefs that these traditions could be traced back to the apostles. Nevertheless, when there was a question about the truthfulness of these traditions, he appealed to Scripture as the final authority. Listen to Basil’s words in his Letter 189, written to Eustathius the Physician:

> Let God-inspired Scripture decide between us; and on whichever side be found doctrines in harmony with the word of God, in favor of that side will be cast the vote of truth.

Here Basil admitted that some churches affirmed one set of customary ideas in their rule of faith, while other churches had contradictory customs. So, he appealed to Scripture as the highest authority to settle the matter.
The early church relied strongly on Scripture as the basis for all its doctrine. But they still depended on the traditional teachings of the church to summarize and protect the teachings of Scripture.
