## CHURCH

The Apostles’ Creed describes the church in two different phrases. First, the church is called the holy catholic church. Second, the church is described as the communion of saints. These phrases have been interpreted in many different ways, and we will deal with them in greater detail in a future lesson. For now, we will simply point out that the phrase the holy catholic church does not refer to the Roman Catholic Church but to the church in all its parts throughout the world.
Even so, it may seem strange to many Protestants to think about believing in the church in any form. So, it may help to explain that when the creed says “I believe in the ... church,” it does not mean that we place our faith in the church. Rather, it means that we affirm the belief that the church is both holy, or “sanctified,” and “catholic,” meaning universal. 
And we affirm our belief that there is a communion of saints, that is, a fellowship of believers. It is in these senses that historic Christianity has insisted on the importance of the church. 
In this lesson, we will focus on just two aspects of the church that were central to the articles of faith in the Apostles’ Creed. On the one hand, we will look at participation in the church. And on the other hand, we will consider doctrinal preservation by the church. Let’s begin with participation in the church.


### Participation

When the creed says, “I believe in the holy ... church,” it emphasizes the importance of participating in the church. Of course, in the history of the Christian church, there have been many people who wanted to have God as their Father, Jesus as their Lord, and the Holy Spirit as their advocate, but who did not want to be part of the visible church, the gathered people of God. As we read in Hebrews 10:25:

> Let us not give up meeting together, as some are in the habit of doing (Hebrews 10:25).

Even in the first century, some professing believers wanted to avoid the gathered church as a place for worship, teaching and fellowship. But Scripture teaches that the church is important and necessary for Christians.
Of course, those who originally used the Apostles’ Creed were not like this. On the contrary, the creed was used particularly in church services. And it was affirmed by those who came to the church for baptism. They came to be joined to its numbers, to be included in its gatherings. This is the model that the creed puts forth for us to follow.
Even so, in the modern world we still encounter Christians who avoid the church. Perhaps it is because they dislike organized religion. Or maybe they have been mistreated by other Christians. Or perhaps they think that it is sufficient to read Christian books, watch Christian television, and use Christian websites. 
But the Bible teaches Christians to form an actual, physical community, and it insists that this community is extremely important to every believer. It is not to be limited to spiritual fellowship, although it is true that Christians have spiritual communion with each other through Christ and his Spirit. Rather, our community is to be like a family or neighborhood. It is to consist of people who interact with each other face to face.
With the importance of participation in the church in mind, we should move to doctrinal preservation by and within the church.


### Preservation

> From the earliest days, the regular recitation, confession and memorization of the creeds and confessions in the church served a very, very important role, especially in societies like the first century world and beyond in early Christianity where the literacy rates were very, very low. And so very few people could read and even among those who could read, very few would ever own a Bible. And so, the regular confessions of these creeds publicly in the worship service served again a very important role in providing parameters or what we might call the rule of faith or a ruled reading for what is a proper understanding of how the Scriptures are to be put together. 
> 
> —	Dr. Jonathan T. Pennington

As we mentioned when we spoke of rules of faith, the church is not infallible. And the Apostles’ Creed is not encouraging us to believe whatever our local church teaches. Rather, it is simply affirming the fact that Christ appointed his church in part to protect and to proclaim the gospel and other truths. Listen to the way Jude, the brother of Jesus, wrote about the church’s mission in verses 3-4 of his epistle:

> Dear friends, although I was very eager to write to you about the salvation we share, I felt I had to write and urge you to contend for the faith that was once for all entrusted to the saints. For certain men ... have secretly slipped in among you. They are godless men, who change the grace of our God into a license for immorality and deny Jesus Christ our only Sovereign and Lord (Jude 3-4).

According to Jude, part of the church’s job is to contend for the faith, to protect the truths and beliefs that have been entrusted to it against those who promote false teachings and practices.
Now, it should be obvious to most of us that there are many false teachings in various parts of the church today. And there are many sinful practices as well. Nevertheless, God has never withdrawn the church’s assignment, or declared that any other group or individual should take over the job of protecting true doctrine. It is still the job of the church to protect the truth. 
And the church is still trying to do its job. Sometimes we do it better than others. Some of our theology is faithful to Scripture, but other parts of it need to be improved, or even changed altogether. And this will always be the case. But for our purposes in this lesson, the point we want to make is this: We can’t give up. We have to keep trying to preserve doctrine in the church. And if we abandon this call, we are denying a central article of the historic Christian faith: I believe in the church.
Now that we have looked at the articles of faith related to God and the church, we are ready to turn to our third category: the statements about salvation that are presented in the Apostles’ Creed.


### SALVATION

> The Apostles’ Creed contains a lot about salvation near the end. Some people have wondered why they are at the end, rather than some other place. And, of course, the creed itself doesn’t really tell us. But, if you look at it, the way that it looks to me, is that the creed wants to establish the Godhead — Father, Son, and Holy Spirit — to be sure that the experience of salvation is flowing from that Godhead, and not from any kind of human construct or human system. To know who God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit is leads to the invitation and the promise that we can be saved if we confess our sins. And so I think those statements are at the end to show that the fruit of our relationship with God comes from the root of who God is in that Trinity. 
> 
> —	Dr. Steve Harper

The last three articles of faith in the creed deal with aspects of salvation. Specifically, they mention the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting. In traditional systematic theology, resurrection and everlasting life are also treated under the heading of eschatology, the doctrine of last things. But for the sake of simplicity, we will only address them under the heading of salvation.
All Christians believe in the forgiveness of sins through the atoning work of Jesus Christ. We believe that if we confess and repent of our sins, God will not punish us in hell for them. And as the Apostles’ Creed indicates, this has been the belief of the church from its earliest days. And we all know Scriptures that teach us that all those who are forgiven are blessed with eternal life through Jesus Christ. For instance, John 3:16-18 encourages us with these words:

> God so loved the world that he gave his one and only Son, that whoever believes in him shall not perish but have eternal life… Whoever believes in him is not condemned (John 3:16-18).

Eternal life belongs to every believer. In some respects, it begins the moment we come to faith, since our souls are given new life and will never die.
But the nature of the eternal life affirmed by the creed sometimes surprises modern Christians. Specifically, the creed speaks about the resurrection of the body. Sometimes, Christians make the mistake of thinking that the creed is referring to the resurrection of Jesus. But it is not. Jesus’ resurrection is mentioned earlier in the creed, in the words “The third day he rose from the dead.” This article of faith is not repeated. 
Rather, when the creed speaks of the resurrection of the dead, it is referring to the biblical teaching that all people will be resurrected on the Day of Judgment, and that they will go to their eternal fates, not as disembodied spirits, but as physical, bodily creatures. This is the consistent teaching of Scripture, and it has been an article of faith in the church for thousands of years. As Jesus taught in John 5:28-29:

> A time is coming when all who are in their graves will hear [the Son’s] voice and come out — those who have done good will rise to live, and those who have done evil will rise to be condemned (John 5:28-29).

The creed’s statements about salvation are taught clearly in Scripture and have always been embraced by biblical churches. Even so, many modern people who claim to follow Christ reject these basic, fundamental teachings. There are some who deny that God holds us accountable for our sin, and who insist that forgiveness is unnecessary. There are unbelievers in our churches who teach that this life is all there is, and that any so-called “eternal” life we possess is limited to our time on earth in our physical bodies. And there are many who wrongly believe that we will spend eternity as disembodied spirits in heaven. For reasons like these, the articles of faith in the Apostles’ Creed are just as important and relevant for the church today as they were in the early centuries. 
In summary, the Apostles’ Creed focuses on doctrines related to God, the church, and salvation. In other lessons in this series, we will explore each of these concepts in much greater depth. But for now, we simply want to make sure that we understand the big picture — that this handful of doctrines is so central and fundamental that they have effectively defined the boundaries of Christianity for hundreds and hundreds of years.
So far in our discussion of the Apostles’ Creed as the articles of faith, we have spoken of the history of the creed, and offered an overview of its theology. Now, we’re ready to move to our third major topic: the continuing importance of the articles of faith listed in the Apostles’ Creed.
