## IMPORTANCE

We will mention three aspects of the importance of the doctrinal statements in the Apostles’ Creed. First, we will explain that these teachings are foundational to the rest of Christian theology. Second, we’ll talk about the universal affirmation of these teachings throughout the church. And third, we’ll speak of the unifying nature of these articles of faith. Let’s begin by exploring the foundational qualities of the doctrines in the Apostles’ Creed.


### FOUNDATIONAL

Most people are familiar with the idea that large buildings need solid foundations. The foundation is the base on which the rest of the building is created. It is the anchor that holds the building firmly in place, and that provides strength and stability for the entire structure. 
In Ephesians 2:19-21, Paul spoke of the church as a building founded on the apostles and prophets. Listen to his words there:

> You are … members of God’s household, built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, with Christ Jesus himself as the chief cornerstone. In him the whole building is joined together and rises to become a holy temple in the Lord (Ephesians 2:19-21).

Without a solid, true foundation, the church could not be built in a way that honored God.
And in a similar way, Christian theology must be founded on true doctrines and principles if it is to honor God and be useful to his people. Just as Jesus is the cornerstone of the church, his teachings are the cornerstone of theology. And just as the apostles and prophets became the church’s foundation by introducing Christ to the world, the Apostles’ Creed is foundational to theology because it introduces us to the teachings of the apostles recorded in Scripture. 

> The beautiful thing about the Apostles’ Creed is that it summarizes so well basic essential Christian doctrines that every Christian, in all of the diverse denominations that we have today, must affirm. Who God is, who the Lord Jesus Christ is, the work of the Spirit and how that works itself out in the doctrine of salvation, the church, all the way to final judgment and then the second coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. You cannot really have the Christian faith without these key, essential Christian doctrines.
> 
> —	Dr. Stephen J. Wellum

We will consider the foundational nature of the Apostles’ Creed in two parts. First, we will look at how it provides a standard against which other doctrines can be judged. And second, we will speak of the way that it serves as the logical basis on which other true doctrines are built. Let’s begin with the Apostles’ Creed as a theological standard.


#### Standard

The Apostles’ Creed functions as a doctrinal standard because it presents several of the biggest, most important ideas of Christianity. These ideas are taught so clearly in Scripture that they should be recognized and embraced by everyone. As we said earlier in this lesson, these teachings are essential to Christianity. As a result, every other doctrine that we embrace must be compatible with these teachings. We cannot accept any idea that contradicts these essential teachings.
Have you ever seen a ventriloquist? A ventriloquist is a performer who can speak in a way that makes it look like he is not speaking. Ventriloquists often perform with puppets, making it look like the puppet is carrying on a conversation with the ventriloquist. A skilled performer can make the puppet seem almost as if it were alive. But no matter how convincing the performance is, we know that it is really the ventriloquist who is speaking and not the puppet. Why?
Well, the answer is simple. We know that puppets aren’t alive, and that they can’t really talk. So, when we observe a puppet that appears to talk, we judge our experience by the standard of what we know to be true. No matter how much it looks like the puppet is talking, our standard tells us that the appearance is deceptive. And so we refuse to believe it. We may not be able to explain how the puppet can appear to be alive and to speak its mind. But we know that there must be a logical explanation that is consistent with our standard.
In a similar way, the Apostles’ Creed summarizes those central beliefs that we hold so strongly that we will never change them. We believe that the Bible is so clear on these points, and that they are so important, that we cannot compromise on them. So, no matter what other perspectives people present to us, we refuse to believe anything that conflicts with these central teachings of Scripture.
Using the creed as a standard helps us remain faithful to Scripture when convincing false teachers present us with bad theology. Many of us have met people who are so good with their arguments, and who are so compelling as individuals, that we are inclined to believe most things they say — even when they are mistaken or lying. So, it helps to have a short list of essential beliefs that can anchor us to the teachings of Scripture. And the Apostles’ Creed provides such an anchor. 
For example, there were several major heresies that the church responded to in the early centuries of its life. And one of these was Gnosticism. Among other things, Gnosticism taught that our physical bodies are evil, and that salvation involves freeing our souls from their imprisonment in our bodies. Now, not every Christian in the early church knew how to refute this error. But those who had been trained in the doctrines of the Apostles’ Creed could confidently reject this heresy on the basis that Scripture teaches the resurrection of the body. That is, it teaches that Jesus came to redeem us as whole persons, including not only our souls, but also our bodies.
Many of us have been confused by a clever argument, or misled by mistaken or misrepresented data. Now, we can’t always explain what is wrong with these arguments and findings. But even so, we can confidently reject those things that contradict the Apostles’ Creed, because we know that the creed is faithful to Scripture. 
Of course, we never want to raise the Apostles’ Creed or any other statement of faith to the level of Scripture. The Bible alone is absolutely unquestionable. And even the articles of faith in the Apostles’ Creed should be rejected if they can be shown to contradict Scripture. But the Apostles’ Creed has stood the test of time since the earliest centuries of the church. It has been shown repeatedly to be an accurate representation of the Bible. So, we should feel confident using it as a standard for judging the many doctrines we encounter in the modern world.
Having considered the way the Apostles’ Creed can serve as a useful doctrinal standard, we are ready to talk about another of its foundational aspects: its use as the logical basis for other theological viewpoints.


#### Logical Basis
	
The logical relationship between ideas is similar to the relationship between a river and its headwater or source. Logically basic ideas are like the river’s headwater. They are the source of other ideas. And logically dependent ideas are like the river that naturally flows from that headwater. So, when we say that one idea serves as the logical basis for another, we mean that we can create a reasonable argument that moves from the logically basic idea to the establishment of other ideas that are logically dependent. 
For instance, the Apostles’ Creed says very few things explicitly about God the Father. All it says is:
	
> I believe in God the Father Almighty, 
> Maker of heaven and earth.

But these doctrines form the logical basis for many other things we believe about the Father. For instance, on the basis that God is the maker of heaven and earth, we also rightly believe that he has authority over heaven and earth, and that the original creation was good, and that we can learn things about God by looking at the natural world. 
We can illustrate the value of logically basic doctrines by looking at a tree. We might think of the ground itself as Scripture, with the tree of theology growing out of it. The trunk of the tree, and its major branches, represent the most basic doctrines. These are based on and dependent on Scripture alone. But as the major branches divide into more and smaller branches, they move to beliefs that logically flow from the larger branches. And as we look at the leaves on the tree, we are looking at ideas that depend on the smaller branches. When we picture it this way, the value of beginning with the Apostles’ Creed becomes clear. We need to learn the big doctrines first, to get the shape of the tree in place, and firmly rooted in Scripture. 
This does two things for us. First, it helps us see the relationship between the various different beliefs in our theological systems. And second, it helps us think about doctrines that are more remote from Scripture in ways that harmonize these less-central ideas with our fundamental beliefs.

> The doctrines in the Apostles’ Creed crystallize the essence of Christian truth. The Apostles’ Creed dates really from the second century; it took a number of forms in the second century, and finally took the form that we are used to. And there you have the Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. There you have the incarnation and the atoning death and the triumphant resurrection and forthcoming return of the Lord Jesus. There you have the forgiveness of sins. There you have the reality of the church as the fellowship of those who are born again in Christ. And I think that there could be nothing really healthier in any church than periodically to work over the Apostles’ Creed and highlight those doctrines. 
> 
> —	Dr. J. I. Packer

Now that we have looked at the importance of the Apostles’ Creed in terms of its foundational nature, we are ready to describe the universal affirmation of its teachings.


### UNIVERSAL

One way that we judge the truth of facts is by looking at what different witnesses have to say. The more witnesses that point to the truth of an idea, the more likely we are to believe it. Well, the same thing is true in theology. As we try to determine what we should believe, it helps to know what other people throughout history have believed, as well as what people in the modern world believe. And when it comes to the Apostles’ Creed, its doctrinal statements have always been affirmed by most Christians in most places.
We will explore the universal nature of the articles of faith in the Apostles’ Creed in three historical periods. First, we will see that these beliefs are grounded in the New Testament. Second, we will see that they have been affirmed by most Christians throughout church history. And third, we will look at the ways they continue to characterize the church in the present. Let’s begin with the New Testament, and its consistent affirmation of these doctrines.


#### New Testament

From the earliest days of the church, there have been disagreements over the teaching of Christ and of the apostles. Some of these disagreements have arisen outside the church, while others have come from within the church. For instance, Paul frequently wrote against the Jewish Christians who demanded that Gentile converts be circumcised, as in Galatians 5. And in 2 Peter 2, Peter warned that there would be false teachers in the church. The New Testament is full of examples of Jesus and the apostles correcting the mistaken ideas of various people. 
And errors in the church are dangerous when critical beliefs are at stake. This is why Jesus and the authors of the New Testament were so concerned to correct errors on fundamental points of theology. And the remarkable thing is that as they offered their corrections, they agreed entirely with each other. Despite the many false teachings that existed in the church at this time, the New Testament exhibits unfailing doctrinal unity with itself. 

> The fact that the church established a canon made up of these books — which by the way took the church centuries actually to do, so it wasn’t just a quick process — indicates that the considered judgment of the church is that there is a core of unity here. That’s not a consideration that we can easily pass off, and as a matter of fact, that has been the judgment of scholars within the church over the last 2000 years. And yet, while we can talk about a core of unity between the New Testament documents, you do have to acknowledge that there are differences in perspective between them. I think the operative issue is that the differences of perspectives do not actually come down to a contradiction of doctrinal assertions. You get different perspectives, different emphasis, different ways of talking about the reality, different aspects of the reality. But, in my judgment at least, there is no blatant contradiction between the various books of the New Testament. 
> 
> —	Dr. David R. Bauer

In light of this unity, when the New Testament affirms the articles of faith listed in the Apostles’ Creed, it is fair to say that it does so universally. It consistently argues for the divinity of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, while at the same time insisting that there is only one God. The Gospels present the creedal facts of Christ’s conception, birth, life, ministry, death, resurrection and ascension. And the books of the New Testament entirely support the creed’s statements about the church and salvation.
Having looked at the New Testament, let’s see how these beliefs have universally characterized Christianity throughout church history.
