#### Church History
	
Just like the church in the New Testament, the church of later centuries exhibited a variety of theologies. On many minor issues, there was very little unity. But the more central doctrines, such as the articles of faith in the Apostles’ Creed, were received and affirmed almost universally. And in those cases where these fundamental beliefs were rejected, the church and history have largely counted the dissenters as schismatics and false teachers.
As just one example, consider the events of the fourth century A.D. The earliest versions of the Apostles’ Creed were already in use at this time. At this point in history, several heresies arose that the church dealt with in its councils. Some of these were local councils, but others were considered to be ecumenical because they included bishops from most parts of the church throughout the world. For instance, the Council of Nicea in A.D. 325 and the Council of Constantinople in A.D. 381 were ecumenical councils dealing with issues related to several of the articles of faith in the Apostles’ Creed. 
The modern Nicene Creed was initially drafted at the Council of Nicea in A.D. 325, and it reached its modern form at the Council of Constantinople in A.D. 381. It is largely an expansion and explanation of the Apostles’ Creed, intended to clarify several of its ideas for the sake of denying false interpretations of the creed. 
For instance, the heresy known as Gnosticism taught that the God of the Bible that created the world had himself been created by another god. Heresies like Gnosticism were not explicitly condemned by the Apostles’ Creed, so the Nicene Creed added language to make the intent of the Apostles’ Creed clearer.
Specifically, where the Apostles’ Creed merely said “I believe in God the Father almighty, Maker of heaven and earth,” the Nicene Creed offered this expanded statement: We believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth, of all things visible and invisible. Notice four things here: 
First, the Nicene Creed is based on the Apostles’ Creed. By basing their own creed on the Apostles’ Creed, the ecumenical Nicene Council demonstrated that the church universally affirmed the Apostles’ Creed. 
Second, the Nicene Creed began with the word “we” in place of the word “I.” Whereas the Apostles’ Creed had been intended as an individual’s profession of faith at baptism, the Nicene Creed was a statement that the church universally and collectively endorsed these same doctrines. 
Third, the Nicene Creed offered a clarification by adding the word “one” before the word “God.” This made explicit what the Apostles’ Creed had implied: that there is only one God.
And fourth, the Nicene Creed offered the clarification that God created everything, including invisible things such as spirits. This made it clear that God himself was not created. Again, this point was implicit in the Apostles’ Creed, so that the Nicene Creed was simply clarifying the matter.
These types of affirmations and clarifications continued to be offered by other councils and theologians throughout the centuries. At times, the decisions of councils were not accepted by all churches. One council would condemn the views of some churches; another council would condemn the views of other churches. But in most cases, the churches on both sides of these controversies continued to affirm the basic principles of the Apostles’ Creed. 
For this reason, the Apostles’ Creed has commonly been viewed as the most basic and most ecumenical statement of the Christian faith. Only the Nicene Creed has approached the Apostles’ Creed in terms of ecumenical acceptance throughout history. But the Nicene Creed is not nearly as basic. It includes several theological statements that even theologians often misunderstand. This is why we have chosen the Apostles’ Creed as the foundation for this study of the central tenets of the Christian faith.
So far, we have indicated the New Testament’s universal agreement with the Apostles’ Creed, and mentioned the acceptance of its doctrines throughout church history. Now we are ready to speak of the present, noting that these same beliefs still characterize the Christian church.


#### Present

In every age, false teachers have denied basic beliefs that the church has held for centuries. In the modern world, cults such as the Jehovah’s Witnesses and the Mormons consider themselves to be Christians because they accept the Bible and attempt to follow Christ in some manner. But they are not truly Christian because they deny basic beliefs that have defined the boundaries of Christianity for two thousand years — beliefs that can be found in the articles of faith in the Apostles’ Creed. Even some churches that are not recognized as cults deny similarly basic teachings, as do certain individual teachers within Christian churches.
But if so many people reject doctrines listed in the Apostles’ Creed, how can we say that the creed universally characterizes the church today? Well, the answer is twofold. For one thing, the vast majority of churches that claim to be Christian affirm these doctrines. They are taught and believed by conservative Protestants of all types, including Baptists, Methodists, Lutherans, Anglicans, Presbyterians, and so on. They are also affirmed by larger non-Protestant churches, such as the Roman Catholic Church and the churches of Eastern Orthodoxy. 
Besides this, churches that deny these doctrines probably shouldn’t be called “Christian.” While they may endorse the Bible and claim to follow Christ, they do not actually embrace the teachings of Scripture or of the historic church. And because of this, they are not genuinely Christian. 

> Well when you think about the importance of the doctrines that are expressed in the Apostles’ Creed for instance, these things are utterly essential to the life of the church and our understanding of the nature of the gospel and our understanding of our own salvation in Christ. For instance, the creeds announce to us the Triune nature of God: God is Father, God is Son, and God is Holy Spirit. So, if we’re going to be Christian, we can’t pretend as though the doctrine of the Trinity is some nice little extra coating on our faith, as though it gives it an extra little “zing” of some kind. Instead the doctrine of the Trinity is a statement about who our God, in his essence, truly is. 
> 
> —	Dr. Steve Blakemore


> I would say the doctrines in the Apostles’ Creed are essential and basic to Christianity. And indeed, if you veer away from them, you’re departing from the historic Christian faith. That’s the experience of the early church, they discovered there were all kinds of different ways in which the Bible could be interpreted and they said, “this is the correct way.” It’s like a railway track: “This is the correct groove in which to interpret the Bible.” Go this way and you’re departing from the essential Christian faith. And so, to this day the Apostles’ Creed, I think, defines the essential nature of authentic Biblical faith. 
> 
> —	Dr. Peter Walker

Because the beliefs summarized in the Apostles’ Creed are so foundational and universal, they exert a unifying influence among believers. This is particularly valuable today because there is so much division in the modern church.


### UNIFYING
	
Maybe you have met sincere Christians who resist learning theology because they are convinced that doctrine only divides Christians against each other. They spread this resistance to formal theology with slogans like: “Jesus unites us, but doctrine divides us.” And there is a measure of truth in this position. Christians throughout the ages have separated from each other, condemned each other, persecuted each other and even waged wars over doctrinal matters. Even so, the New Testament still encourages the church to strive for doctrinal unity. For instance, in Ephesians 4:11-13, we read these words:

> [Jesus] gave some to be apostles, some to be prophets, some to be evangelists, and some to be pastors and teachers ... so that the body of Christ may be built up until we all reach unity in the faith and in the knowledge of the Son of God and become mature, attaining to the whole measure of the fullness of Christ (Ephesians 4:11-13).

In this passage, Paul referred to the church as the body of Christ. And he indicated that the church cannot reach maturity in Christ until we are united in faith and in knowledge. For this reason, doctrinal unity should be the goal of every Christian.
Of course, many other aspects of our Christian life should influence our study of doctrine. We need to do things like love God and our neighbors, pursue holiness, rely on the power of the Holy Spirit, and meditate on God and his word. When we simply focus on doctrine and ignore other concerns, we often go badly astray. 
As the apostle Paul warned in 1 Corinthians 13:2:

> If I ... can fathom all mysteries and all knowledge ... but have not love, I am nothing (1 Corinthians 13:2).

As this verse and many others indicate, gaining theological knowledge is important, but it is not the greatest good of Christian faith.
One of the most effective ways to avoid the destructive consequences of theological controversy is to delight in the doctrinal unity we share with all followers of Christ around the world. When we balance our concern for the details of theology with a proper concern for unity, doctrine can actually unite us rather than divide us.

> The Church of Jesus Christ today is quite concerned about unity. We have so many denominations and different points of view on the Holy Spirit, on women, on baptism. Yet it seems that today in the twenty-first century we are more concerned about getting together on the basis of action, reaching the world, rather than on the basis of the truth. It is very interesting that our Lord Jesus and also the apostle Paul, when they think of unity — I’m thinking of the gospel of John 17 and Ephesians 4 — that they’re thinking about the unity that we have because of our one God, one Lord, one Spirit, one faith, one baptism. And so, it is the truths, or the body of truth that we believe in, that needs to be the foundation of our unity in Christ. 
> 
> —	Dr. Samuel Ling

Throughout the world there are hundreds of millions of true followers of Christ who stand firmly committed to the central biblical teachings expressed in the Apostles’ Creed. In fact, at this very moment countless Christians suffer persecution and even martyrdom for these commitments. They may disagree with us about a number of other theological issues. In fact, they may object strongly to viewpoints that you and I hold dear. But despite our differences, we stand together in what the creed says about God, the church, and salvation. Remember what Jesus prayed for the church in John 17:23:

> May they be brought to complete unity to let the world know that you sent me and have loved them even as you have loved me (John 17:23).

Notice that Jesus said that unity in the church was proof that he had been sent by the Father. When we stand shoulder to shoulder with other followers of Christ, stressing what we have in common theologically, we testify to the world that the gospel is true, and this empowers our evangelism.

> Having defined the gospel and having agreed on the common ground of the gospel, I think one way that we can pursue unity and truth is to say that we are so committed to that unity that we have in the gospel, that we are going to pursue unity with one another, in life and ministry, in such a way that we do not ask one another to relinquish our convictions of truth. But we in fact celebrate even those areas in which we differ from one another. We differ from one another respectfully. We differ from one another intelligently. We differ from one another lovingly. But we look for things in one another that we have mutual joy in, at the truth and convictional level. And we celebrate those things to a certain extent, so that the unity is enjoyed and so that we can have legitimate, conscientious differences in other areas of our theological convictions.
> 
> —	Dr. J. Ligon Duncan III

The Apostles’ Creed can help Christians everywhere to differentiate between essential beliefs and beliefs that are of secondary importance. As we stress this creed in our personal lives and in the corporate life of the church, we will find that theology doesn’t necessarily divide us from each other. Instead, we will find ourselves uniting with other faithful servants of Christ, and thereby fulfilling Jesus’ own vision for his church. 
