## CONCLUSION
	
In this lesson introducing the articles of faith of the Apostles’ Creed, we have spoken of the history of the creed in terms of its development and purpose. We have provided an overview of its doctrines in terms of God, the church, and salvation. And we have mentioned the importance of its articles of faith in terms of their foundational, universal, and unifying nature.
The Apostles’ Creed is an extremely important historical document that has summarized central Christian beliefs for hundreds and hundreds of years. Even today, it continues to offer a unified starting point for Christian theologians in every denomination. In the lessons that follow in this series, we will explore the articles of faith in the Apostles’ Creed in greater detail, looking at how they represent the truths of Scripture that unify Christian teaching throughout the world.

 
## CONTRIBUTORS

Dr. Van Gayton (Host) is Academic Dean at The Williams Bible Institute and Seminary and has been a renowned Bible teacher and lecturer at a number of distinguished seminaries and universities throughout the world. Dr. Gayton also served as the Chaplain of the Federal Bureau of Prisons for four years and was on the Board of Directors for the Institute of Religion and Public Policy in Washington D.C. Dr. Gayton holds a Master of Theology from International Seminary, a Master of Divinity from Logos Bible College, a Doctor of Bible Philosophy from Christian Leadership University, a Doctor of Theology from Faith Theological Seminary, and a Doctor of Ministry from Reformed Theological Seminary. He was consecrated as a bishop in Apostolic Succession and served as Archbishop of the International Community of Christian Churches, a ministry committed to restoring the historical unity of the Body of Christ.


Dr. David R. Bauer is Dean of the School of Biblical Interpretation and the Ralph Waldo Beeson Professor of Inductive Biblical Studies at Asbury Theological Seminary.

Dr. Steve Blakemore is the Assistant Professor of Philosophy at Wesley Biblical Seminary.

Dr. Paul Chang is the Senior Pastor of Monmouth Chinese Christian Church in Middletown, New Jersey.

Dr. J. Ligon Duncan III is Chancellor and CEO of Reformed Theological Seminary and the John E. Richards Professor of Systematic and Historical Theology.

Dr. Steve Harper is the founding Vice President of the Florida-Dunnam campus of Asbury Theological Seminary in Orlando, FL, and retired Professor of Spiritual Formation and Wesley Studies.

Dr. Riad Kassis is International Director of the International Council for Evangelical Theological Education.

Dr. Samuel Ling is Co-founder of China Horizon.

Dr. Robert G. Lister is Associate Professor of Biblical and Theological Studies at the Talbot School of Theology.

Dr. R. Albert Mohler, Jr. is President of The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.

Dr. John Oswalt is the Visiting Distinguished Professor of Old Testament at Asbury Theological Seminary.

Dr. J. I. Packer (1926-2020) was Board of Governors’ Professor of Theology at Regent College in Vancouver, British Columbia and preached and lectured widely in Great Britain and America.

Dr. Jonathan T. Pennington is Associate Professor of New Testament Interpretation and the Director of Research Doctoral Studies at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.

Dr. K. Erik Thoennes is Professor of Biblical and Theological Studies at Biola University’s Talbot School of Theology and is Chair of the Biblical and Theological Studies Theology Department.

Dr. Peter Walker has served as Professor of Biblical Studies at Trinity School for Ministry and as Associate Vice-Principal at Wycliffe Hall, Oxford. He is currently an instructor with Jerusalem Center for Biblical Studies.

Dr. Stephen J. Wellum is Professor of Christian Theology at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.

 
## GLOSSARY
 
 
Apostles, the – Jesus' original 12 disciples 

apostolic/apostolical – Of or relating to the Apostles

Augustine – (A.D. 354-430) Bishop of Hippo who believed in the Scriptures as our final authority in doctrine and considered the creeds of the church to be helpful summaries of scriptural teaching; wrote numerous works that continue to influence the church today

Basil of Caesarea – (A.D. 330-379) Bishop of Caesarea elected in A.D. 370 who defended the Scriptures as the final authority in doctrine

catholic – Term meaning "universal"; used in the Apostles' Creed to describe the church as including all believers, from all places, throughout all of history

Christ – From the Greek word "christos" meaning "the anointed" or "anointed one"; closely tied to the Old Testament Hebrew term "messiah" 

Cyprian – (ca. A.D. 200-258) Bishop of Carthage in the third century who wrote that traditional teachings of the church should not have more authority than the Scriptures

Docetists – Heretical sect that denied Christ's humanity and taught that Christ only appeared to be human but did not have a real, physical body

ecclesiastical – Relating to the church, especially as an established institution

eternal life – To know God and live forever in the full blessing of God
 
Gnosticism – Early heresy from the first centuries after Christ; believed that material things were evil, including the human body; therefore, God would never take on the form of human flesh, so Jesus was not both God and man

Hippolytus – (ca. A.D. 170-236) Theologian from Rome who wrote Against the Heresy of One Noetus in which he defended the Scriptures as the final authority in doctrine
Irenaeus – (ca. A.D. 130-202) Second-century bishop and early Christian writer who wrote Against Heresies in which he refuted Gnosticism and affirmed the validity of the four gospels

Islam – Monotheistic religion of Muslims that adheres to the words and teachings of Muhammad; believes, among other things, that Jesus was a true prophet of God, but he was not crucified or, resurrected or divine

Nicene Creed – Creed written by a council held in Nicaea in A.D. 325; an expansion of the Apostles' Creed that affirmed the doctrine of the Trinity and refuted Arianism

Origen – (ca. A.D. 185-254) Early Christian theologian from Alexandria; his works include: On First Principles, in which he defended the Scriptures as our final authority for Christian doctrine, and the Hexapla, a comparative study of various translations of the Old Testament

Roman Creed/Old Roman Creed – A creed used in the church of Rome in the early centuries after Christ; most likely the predecessor to the Apostles' Creed
 

salvation – Deliverance from the tyranny of evil and from God's judgment against sin through the life, death and resurrection of Jesus Christ

sola Scriptura – Latin phrase meaning "Scripture alone"; the belief that the Scriptures stand as the supreme and final judge of all theological questions; one of the basic principles of the Reformation
 

theology – Any matter that refers directly to God or that describes subjects in relation to God

Trinity – Theological term used to express the fact that God is one essence in three persons

