
# Study Guide 
# Theological Foundations
# Module Six – Salvation

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for the final exam of the Theological Foundations course.
.
**********************************

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 – 46:57


Introduction 

I. Forgiveness 

      A. Problem of Sin 

  	1. Definition of Sin 

  	2. Origin of Sin 

  	3. Consequences of Sin 

      B. Divine Grace 

  	1. Father 

  	2. Son 

  	3. Holy Spirit 

      C. Individual Responsibility 

  	1. Conditions 

  	2. Means 



## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. What aspects of our salvation are mentioned in the Apostles’ Creed? 

2. How does 1 John 3:4 define sin?

3. Explain the difference between sins of "commission" and sins of "omission."

4. On what are God's commands based? That is, what do they reflect?

5. What should motivate our obedience to God?

6. What are the consequences of sin and the Fall? 

7. How does the lesson define God’s "grace"? 

8. Explain the role of each person of the Trinity in salvation. 

9. According to the lesson, what are the conditions for forgiveness? 

10. Explain the aspects of saving faith.

11. What is the BASIS of our forgiveness?

12. What is the MEANS of our forgiveness?

13. What does the lesson teach about the role of the sacraments of baptism and the Lord´s Supper in our salvation? 

14. Make sure you are familiar with the contents of the following Bible passages: 

   1 John 5:3 
   Romans 5:12-19 
   Romans 3:23-24
   2 Thessalonians 2:13
   Psalm 103:8-13
   Psalm 51:16,17
   1 John 1:9

