## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 46:58 - 1:18:45

II. Resurrection 

      A. Curse 

      B. Gospel 

  	1. Old Testament 

  	2. New Testament 

  	3. Resurrection of Jesus 

      C. Redemption 

  	1. Present Life 

  	2. Intermediate State 

  	3. New Life



## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. When the Apostles’ Creed speaks of the "resurrection of the body," to what is it referring? 

2. What is the teaching of the lesson regarding whether there is a biblical distinction between the "soul" and the "spirit" of man?

3. Was man's body affected by the Fall?

4. According to the lesson, is human death normal?

5. Will we spend eternity in heaven as spirits without bodies?

6. According to the lesson, when will the "Last Judgment" occur? 

7. Was the teaching about the resurrection of the body taught in the Old Testament? 

8. Which Jewish group did NOT believe in the resurrection? 

9. Is there a difference in the teaching of the Old and New Testaments regarding the way of salvation? 

10. What is the best guarantee that believers will be resurrected?

11. When does the sanctification of the body begin for those who believe in Christ? 

12. According to the lesson, what happens to a believer in the intermediate state, after his death, but before the final resurrection? 

13. What will change in our relation to sin in the intermediate state?

14. What does the Westminster Shorter Catechism say about the intermediate state? 

15. In the theology of salvation, what is "glorification"? 

16. Make sure you are familiar with the contents of the following Bible passages:

  Genesis 3:19 
  Daniel 12:1-2
  Isaiah 16:19-21
  Romans 6:4-5
  1 Corinthians 15:20-23
  Romans 8:23

 
 
## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 1:18:45 – 1:40:37


III. Everlasting Life 

      A. Timing 

      B. Quality 

      C. Location 

Conclusion



## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. When does our "eternal life" begin? 

2. What is the meaning of "eternal life"? 

3. Will there be rewards and punishments for works done in this life?

4. Who will be raised from the dead in bodily form? Only believers?

5. According to the lesson, when we receive our resurrected glorified bodies, where will we dwell eternally? 

6. The lesson teaches that life here on earth now is a foretaste of what? 

7. Make sure you are familiar with the contents of the following Bible passages:

  John 5:24 
  John 6:40
  John 17:3 
  2 Corinthians 12:2-4
  Revelation 21:1-5 

 
