# The Apostles’ Creed
Lesson Four
The Holy Spirit

## INTRODUCTION

Every Christian tradition has an emphasis. Some traditions emphasize worship. Some emphasize doctrine and truth. Some emphasize social involvement and good works. Some emphasize unity among believers. Some emphasize vibrant Christian living. And these are all good emphases.
But there is one underlying reality, often overlooked by many Christians, that unites all of our emphases. He is the one from whom all these good things in the body of Christ flow. He is the person that encourages and empowers us in these and all other areas of the Christian faith. He is always with us, laboring to apply salvation to us. He is the very life within us. He is none other than the Holy Spirit of God.
This is the fourth lesson in our series on The Apostles’ Creed. And we have entitled this lesson “The Holy Spirit” because we’ll be focusing on the article of faith in the creed that affirms belief in the Holy Spirit, the third person of our Triune God. 
The Apostles’ Creed directly addresses the subject of the Holy Spirit in the single line:

> I believe in the Holy Spirit.

The only other statement about him in the creed is that the Holy Spirit conceived Jesus in Mary’s womb. As you can see, the creed says relatively little about the Holy Spirit, at least explicitly. But it implies many important truths about him that have been crucial to believers throughout history. 
Our discussion of the Holy Spirit will divide into three parts. First, we will talk about his divinity, his full membership in the Godhead. Second, we will consider his personhood, noting that the Holy Spirit is a true person, and not simply a divine force. And third, we will explore the work that he did in the past, and that he continues to do today. Let’s begin with the divinity of the Holy Spirit.
