## DIVINITY
	
To explore the Holy Spirit’s divinity, we’ll look in two directions. On the one hand, we’ll see that the Apostles’ Creed affirms belief in the Spirit’s divinity. And on the other hand, we’ll look at the biblical basis for the creed’s teaching. Let’s start with the way the Apostles’ Creed affirms the divinity of the Holy Spirit.


### APOSTLES’ CREED
	
> When it comes to talking about the person of the Holy Spirit, one of the questions that people often ask is whether or not the church always affirmed or professed the divinity of the Holy Spirit. And certainly, we have in the historical record that the Nicene Creed and the Council of Nicea did not clarify that completely about the person of the Spirit, and so there was another council called. That has caused some people to say, “Well the church didn’t always confess the divinity of the Holy Spirit.” I think that’s wrong. The councils were never called to articulate a new doctrine. The councils were always called to clarify what the understanding of the church’s historical and traditional teaching had been in the face of heresy. And, therefore, you can say that we have very good reason to believe that from the apostolic era onward, and through the proclamation of the apostolic fathers and the early theologians of the church, that we can trace a teaching of the divinity of the Holy Spirit.
> 
> —	 Dr. Steve Blakemore

From the outset, we should admit that the Apostles’ Creed does not explicitly state that the Holy Spirit is divine. But it implicitly affirms the Spirit’s divinity in at least two ways. First, its Trinitarian structure equates the Holy Spirit with the Father and the Son in important ways. And second, the creed’s description of Jesus’ conception indicates that the Holy Spirit is divine. Let’s look at both of these issues, beginning with the structure of the creed itself.


#### Structure

You’ll recall that in an earlier lesson, when we approached the creed from the perspective of the doctrine of God, we mentioned that the Apostles’ Creed can be viewed as consisting of three main sections, each beginning with the statement “I believe.” The first section speaks of belief in God the Father. The second section is about belief in Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord. And the third section summarizes belief in the Holy Spirit, and lists his active ministries.
As we saw in a prior lesson, the Apostles’ Creed developed over time, and its earliest versions were local baptismal creeds. Some of these early creeds included the words “I believe” before the articles concerning Jesus. But others simply used the word “and,” like the version of the creed that was standardized around A.D. 700. But regardless of their specific wording, the idea was the same: the creed was divided according to the three persons of God. And this division has been universally recognized by the church. This Trinitarian formula expresses the belief that there is only one God, and that he exists in three persons, namely the persons of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit.
The early church father Hippolytus, who lived from A.D. 170 to 236, explained that the baptismal creed in use in his day made the Trinitarian structure very explicit. This creed probably began as a local creed, but it appears to have grown into fairly widespread use. Its language is very similar to the modern Apostles’ Creed, and the way it was used in baptismal ceremonies highlights its strong Trinitarian emphasis. 
Hippolytus explained that baptism was performed by immersing a person three times. At each immersion, the person being baptized was to affirm the section of the baptismal creed pertaining to one of the persons of the Trinity. First the person confessed belief in the articles of faith relating to the Father; then the person was immersed. Then came affirmation of the articles of faith pertaining to the Son, followed by a second immersion. And finally, the affirmation of the articles related to the Holy Spirit, and the third and final immersion. Through this and similar practices in the early church, we can see that the structure of the creed itself was intentionally designed to highlight the divinity and work of each person of the Trinity, including the Holy Spirit.
The second way that the Apostles’ Creed affirms the divinity of the Holy Spirit is through its description of Jesus’ conception.


#### Jesus’ Conception

The Apostles’ Creed says that Jesus Christ, the Son of God, 

> Was conceived by the Holy Spirit.

This statement does not explicitly declare that the Holy Spirit is fully divine, but it strongly implies this belief. When speaking of Jesus’ conception, the creed alludes to Luke 1:35, where the angel spoke these words to Mary:

> The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you. So the holy one to be born will be called the Son of God (Luke 1:35).

In this verse, the Holy Spirit is equated to the power of the Most High. As we will see later in this lesson, only God can have the power of the Most High. So, by alluding to this verse as an example of the Holy Spirit’s work, the Apostles’ Creed affirms the Spirit’s full divinity. This conclusion is confirmed by Hebrews 10:5-7, which says:

> Therefore, when Christ came into the world, he said: “Sacrifice and offering you did not desire, but a body you prepared for me; with burnt offerings and sin offerings you were not pleased. Then I said, ‘Here I am — it is written about me in the scroll — I have come to do your will, O God’” (Hebrews 10:5-7).

Here, we are told that creating Jesus’ human body was specifically the work of God. In light of verses like these, it is safe to say that when the Apostles’ Creed attributes Jesus’ conception to the Holy Spirit, it intends to affirm the Spirit’s divinity.
Now that we’ve seen how the Apostles’ Creed expresses belief in the divinity of the Holy Spirit, let’s look at the biblical basis for what it says.
