## PERSONHOOD
	
Throughout the history of the church, many groups have denied that the Holy Spirit is a person that has a distinct self-awareness and divine personal attributes. Some have believed that he is simply the Father in another form. Others have argued that the name “Holy Spirit” is just a name that ancient writers used to describe God’s power. But from the structure of the Apostles’ Creed, we can see that it affirms the biblical position that Holy Spirit is a real and distinct person within the Godhead. This is the clear teaching of Scripture, and it has been the position of every branch of the Christian church throughout the ages.

> The Holy Spirit is described in personal terms in the New Testament, not just an impersonal force. And the rest of the church has gathered around that witness and said this is what we also believe. It’s true that in terms of articulating it in the later creed, it took three or four hundred years before there was a real debate about this. But when Basil of Caesarea discusses it in the fourth century, he’s not articulating a new doctrine, he’s just bringing to the table what people have already been believing for three hundred years.
> 
> —	 Dr. Peter Walker

From the outset we need to admit that the Apostles’ Creed does not spell these matters out explicitly. But when we consider the important theological debates about the Holy Spirit in the first few centuries of Christianity, we can see that the creed’s affirmation of the Holy Spirit as a member of the Trinity is also an implied affirmation of his personhood. Along with the rest of biblical Christianity, the Apostles’ Creed rejects de-personalizing the Spirit of God into a mere force or divine power. 
As we consider the biblical basis of the creed’s affirmation of the Holy Spirit’s personhood, our discussion will divide into three parts. First, we’ll look at the personal attributes that the Holy Spirit possesses. Second, we will focus on his personal distinction from the Father and the Son. And third, we will describe his personal relationship to the other members of the Trinity. We’ll begin with the attributes that prove the Holy Spirit is a full person.


### ATTRIBUTES

When we speak of the personal attributes of the Holy Spirit, we have in mind those qualities he possesses that are unique to persons — things that can only be true about him if he’s a real person and not simply an impersonal force.

> I find it very instructive that in the New Testament, that not only does the New Testament talk about the names and titles of God the Father, the works of God the Father, the attributes of God the Father, the actions of God the Father, but it talks about the same of the Son and of the Holy Spirit. In other words, all the personal properties that are attributed to God the Father in the Bible are attributed to God the Holy Spirit in the New Testament. And this, yet again, emphasizes to us that the Holy Spirit is a person, not a force or a power. 
> 
> —	Dr. J. Ligon Duncan III

The Holy Spirit has far too many personal attributes for us to catalog them all in this lesson, so we will simply provide four examples to demonstrate his personhood. We’ll begin by saying that the Holy Spirit has a will. This is the faculty he uses to plan, to desire and to choose. Clearly, any being that can do these things cannot be a mere force or power. As one example of his will, consider 1 Corinthians 12:11, where Paul talked about the distribution of spiritual gifts. Listen to what he wrote:

> One and the same Spirit works all these things, distributing to each one individually just as He wills (1 Corinthians 12:11, NASB).

The Holy Spirit wants certain people to have certain gifts, and others to have other gifts. Impersonal forces do not have plans and desires. Only persons do. Therefore, the Holy Spirit must be a person.
The Holy Spirit also has the attribute of intelligence, through which he possesses knowledge and the ability to teach others. He expresses this intelligence in many ways, such as by searching and knowing the mind of God, as we read in 1 Corinthians 2:10-12, and by having his own mind as we read in Romans 8:27. He also gives wisdom and knowledge, as in 1 Corinthians 12:8. And he teaches in Luke 12:12.
Jesus himself talked about the Spirit’s intelligence in John 14:26. Listen to what he told the apostles there:

> The Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, will teach you all things and will remind you of everything I have said to you (John 14:26).

Impersonal forces do not think, know and teach. So, the attribute of intelligence proves that the Spirit is a person.
The Holy Spirit also has emotions, internal feelings and affections that he expresses in response to other persons and events. Like his other personal attributes, his emotions prove that he is a person, and not simply a power. For example, the Holy Spirit’s love is mentioned in Romans 15:30. His joy is spoken of in 1 Thessalonians 1:6. And listen to the way his grief is talked about in Ephesians 4:30:

> Do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God, with whom you were sealed for the day of redemption (Ephesians 4:30).

The fact that the Holy Spirit has emotions like grief indicates that he is a true person. 
Moreover, the Spirit possesses what we might call the attribute of agency. He has a will, the ability to intend things and to act on his own accord. And this enables him to perform many actions that can only be done by persons. For instance, the Holy Spirit offers testimony in John 15:26 and Romans 8:16. He fellowships with us in Philippians 2:1. And he speaks and commands in Acts 8:29 and 13:2. As just one example, listen to the words of Romans 8:26-27:

> The Spirit himself intercedes for us with groans that words cannot express… the Spirit intercedes for the saints in accordance with God's will (Romans 8:26-27).

The fact that the Holy Spirit prays for believers is another proof of his personhood. Impersonal powers and forces do not pray and intercede, groaning in sincerity. Only persons can do these things.
Charles Spurgeon, the great Baptist preacher who lived from 1834 to 1892, spoke this way in his sermon The Holy Spirit’s Intercession, based on Romans 8:26-27. Listen to what he said:

> The Holy Spirit helps us to bear the infirmity of our body and of our mind; he helps us to bear our cross, whether it be physical pain, or mental depression, or spiritual conflict, or slander, or poverty, or persecution. He helps our infirmity; and with a helper so divinely strong we need not fear for the result. God's grace will be sufficient for us; his strength will be made perfect in weakness. 
> 
> 
> It’s encouraging to know that there’s something at work within me, someone at work within me, that is far more powerful than I. And even though I may sometimes feel helpless, enslaved, whatever it might be, that’s only the feelings talking; that’s not the reality. The almighty Holy Spirit of God is at work relentlessly conforming me to the image of Christ — great encouragement! It’s also sobering because that means that I’m always in the presence of a living God, always living before the face of God. That although I may hide my falls from other people, there is no such thing as secret sin because I live in the very presence if God. And the Holy Spirit is a holy spirit; the Spirit of God is pure. Certainly, as a pastor, I want to hit that balance as I’m counseling people struggling with sin. Don’t be hopeless. The Holy Spirit is at work in your heart and in your life and trust and rest in Christ to give you victory in your struggles with sin. And don’t be complacent because the same Holy Spirit is always at work and present in and with you.
> 
> —	 Dr. Dennis E. Johnson

Now that we have seen how the Holy Spirit’s personal attributes demonstrate his personhood, we are ready to consider his distinction from the Father and Son as a separate person within the Trinity.
