### DISTINCTION

We should begin by admitting that there are several passages in the Bible where the distinction between the Spirit and the other persons of the Trinity is not entirely clear. For example, the Holy Spirit is identified as the Spirit of God’s Son in Galatians 4:6, and as the Spirit of the Father in Matthew 10:20. And he has several other names that highlight the relational connections between the members of the Trinity, rather than their distinctiveness.
Although these kinds of passages were the sources of much debate in the early church, these close associations should not surprise us. After all, the three persons of the Trinity are only one God. So, it makes perfect sense to think of the Holy Spirit as the Spirit of the Father and of the Son, and at the same time to insist that he is an entirely distinct person from them.
One way to highlight the distinctions between the Spirit and the other persons of the Trinity is to look at passages in Scripture that show them interacting with one another in ways that emphasize their differences. There are many passages that show these distinctions, but two passages will suffice to show that the Spirit is distinct from the Son and from the Father. First, consider Jesus’ words in John 16:7:

> I tell you the truth: It is for your good that I am going away. Unless I go away, the Counselor will not come to you; but if I go, I will send him to you (John 16:7).

Jesus said in this instance that the Holy Spirit would not come unless the Son first went away. Clearly, he distinguished himself from the Spirit by saying that one goes before the other comes. Each one had an appointed role, and the role of the Spirit would not begin until the Son had completed his earthly work and ascended into heaven. This makes it clear that the Spirit is distinct from the Son.
In a similar way, the Spirit also does things that distinguish him from the Father. For example, as part of his role as our Counselor, the Holy Spirit is our defense attorney, assisting our prayers by pleading our case before God.

> In general, the work of the Spirit is to apply the work of Christ. Christ has given his life, a sacrifice for us. It’s the work of the Spirit to take that work and apply it to our hearts, and so we need both. I mean if we didn’t have the Spirit to apply it to our hearts we would not be in very good shape because the work of Christ — God intends for it to change us from within. And so, the Spirit comes and the Spirit regenerates, gives us new birth. The Spirit makes us holy — sanctification — and the Spirit is constantly giving us gifts and blessings and fruits in our lives, and all of that, so the work of the Spirit is quite indispensable. 
> 
> —	Dr. John M. Frame
	
For example, in Romans 8:26-27, Paul wrote these words:

> We do not know what we ought to pray for, but the Spirit himself intercedes for us with groans that words cannot express. And he who searches our hearts knows the mind of the Spirit, because the Spirit intercedes for the saints in accordance with God's will (Romans 8:26-27).

When Paul taught that the Holy Spirit intercedes on our behalf with the Father, he demonstrated that they are distinct persons — one interceding, and the other hearing the intercession. 

> He intercedes with the Father. He speaks within our hearts when we don’t know what to pray for and he groans within us, as Paul says, so that we say those things to God that we don’t even know to say. 
> 
> —	Dr. John M. Frame 


> We can say that the normative pattern for prayer is to pray to the Father, in the name of the Son and in the power of the Holy Spirit. And yet we are members of a religion of such grace and freedom that the Holy Spirit can also be directly addressed without any compromising of the integrity of God or any rejection of the trajectory of our prayers. 
> 
> —	Dr. Glen G. Scorgie

This prayer to the Holy Spirit, often attributed to the church father Augustine, who lived from A.D. 354 to 430, provides a wonderful model for our own prayers:

> Breathe in me, O Holy Spirit,
> that my thoughts may all be holy;
> Act in me, O Holy Spirit,
> that my work, too, may be holy;
> Draw my heart, O Holy Spirit,
> that I love but what is holy;
> Strengthen me, O Holy Spirit,
> to defend all that is holy;
> Guard me, then, O Holy Spirit,
> that I always may be holy.

Having talked about the Holy Spirit’s personhood in terms of his personal attributes and his distinction from the Father and Son, let’s now look at his relationship to the other persons of the Trinity.


### RELATIONSHIP

As we have mentioned throughout these lessons, the relationships between the persons of the Trinity have traditionally been described from two different perspectives. Specifically, theologians have spoken of the ontological Trinity and the economic Trinity. Both of these are perspectives on the same Trinity — the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. But they emphasize different aspects of the relationships between these three divine persons. 
When we talk about the ontological Trinity, we are focusing on God’s being and existence. From this perspective, the Holy Spirit is equal in power and glory to the Father and the Son. All three of God’s persons are infinite, eternal and unchangeable. And each has the same essential divine attributes, such as wisdom, power, holiness, justice, goodness and truth. 
And when we talk about the economic Trinity, we are considering how God’s persons interact with each other. From this perspective, each person of the Godhead has different responsibilities, different authority, and a different assigned role. The Spirit’s authority is subject to the higher authority of the Father and the Son. And the Spirit’s role is largely to carry out their instructions and to bring them glory.

> Wherever God is, his Spirit is there. His Spirit not only refers to his presence, but also to his action. And so, as you follow through as God relates to his creation, it’s impossible to describe that without the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit is right now guiding human history. The Holy Spirit is indeed the agent of the very providential care and love of God. 
> 
> —	Dr. R. Albert Mohler, Jr.

In Christian theology, in both the ontological Trinity and the economic Trinity, the Holy Spirit is called the third person. 
He is the third person of the ontological Trinity because he is breathed out by the Father, who is the first person, and by the Son, who is the second person. 
Now, we should pause to say that the churches of Eastern Orthodoxy teach that the Holy Spirit is breathed out by the Father alone, and not by the Son. This difference in teaching was part of the reason for the schism between the Eastern and Western churches that began in A.D. 1054 and continues to this day. Of course, because the Apostles’ Creed was created before this controversy, it did not address this disagreement between the East and the West. And both branches of the church affirm all the statements of the Apostles’ Creed.
With regard to the economic Trinity, the Holy Spirit is said to be the third person because he holds the third rank, being subordinate both to the Father and to the Son. The Scriptures indicate his subordination in a number of ways. For instance, he is sent or given by the Father and the Son. Scripture teaches this in passages like Luke 11:13, John 14:26 and 15:26, and Acts 2:33. And when he comes, the Spirit obeys the Father and the Son by doing the work they’ve sent him to do. We learn of this in places like John 16:13, Romans 8:11, and 1 Peter 1:2. 
Of course, even when we say that the Holy Spirit holds the lowest rank from the perspective of the economic Trinity, it is important to emphasize that he is still fully God, and has absolutely sovereign authority over every aspect of creation. Moreover, within the Trinity, there is a sense of mutual deference, since what one person does, they all do. So, the Holy Spirit’s subordination to the Father and the Son does not mean that he is somehow inherently inferior to them — he is not. He is fully equal to them in their essential divinity. 
The Holy Spirit’s personhood is an indispensable part of Christian theology. And as we have seen, we have many reasons to affirm it. The Holy Spirit possesses attributes that clearly mark him as a distinct, self-aware personality. And his relationships and interactions with the Father and the Son leave no doubt that he is a vibrant person and not simply a mindless force or power. We can and should have great confidence in this traditional doctrine.
So far in this lesson on the Holy Spirit, we have looked at the Apostles’ Creeds’ affirmation of the Spirit’s divinity, and of his full personhood. At this point, we are ready to address our third major topic: the work that the Holy Spirit has done throughout history and continues to do today.
