## WORK

> One benefit of having a rich understanding of the Spirit’s work is just to know that God works with us in a very personal way. He doesn’t press buttons. He comes to us and he interacts with us in a very personal way. So, the Spirit actually dwells in our hearts. He prays with us and for us. He gives us gifts of holiness, and he just gets involved with us in so many ways. In fact, in every phase of our life, he gives us the fruits of Christian virtues, as Paul says in Galatians. He gives us many gifts for service in the church, and all of this is God’s work with us through the Spirit. 
> 
> —	Dr. John M. Frame

Although the Apostles’ Creed does not explicitly describe much about the Spirit’s work, by affirming “I believe in the Holy Spirit,” the creed originally implied a number of beliefs about the work of the Spirit. 
There are many ways to describe the Spirit’s work, but we will explore just four of its aspects. First, we’ll look first at his creative power. Second, we’ll focus on his work of sanctification. Third, we’ll talk about his administration of grace. And fourth, we’ll describe the revelation he provides. Let’s begin with his creative power.


### CREATIVE POWER

By the term “creative power,” we mean both the Holy Spirit’s ability to create new things, and his ability to govern and to alter what has been created.

> When you read the opening chapter of the Bible, Genesis 1, the Spirit is hovering above the waters, the Holy Spirit. When you turn to Colossians 1, we read that Christ is the creator, and he creates by means of the Holy Spirit. The Spirit is also involved in re-creation. Recreation in terms of what we might think of in conversion. It is the Spirit who regenerates. Unless a man is born of the Spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of God. But the Spirit is not only at work in regenerating us individually, but in regenerating the cosmos. So, Paul speaks in Romans 8 that the creation itself groans and travails in birth, waiting for the regeneration of all things, a work of the Holy Spirit. 
> 
> —	Dr. Derek Thomas

Our discussion of the Holy Spirit’s creative power will focus on three different levels of his activity. First, we’ll talk about his creative works in the natural world. Second, we’ll focus on the spiritual gifts he provides to the church. And third, we will consider his role in the personal renewal of our human spirits and hearts. Let’s begin with the way his creative power is demonstrated in the natural world.


#### Natural World

The Holy Spirit’s creative power in the natural world is first seen in the opening verses of the Bible. Earlier in this lesson, we looked at the Spirit’s role in the creation account of Genesis 1, noting that he exercised divine omnipotence to create the world from nothing. We find a similar idea in Psalm 104:30, where the psalmist praised God for sending his Spirit to create the earth and all of its creatures, not only in the original creation week, but also on a daily basis. Psalm 33:6 echoes this idea, and Job 33:4 extends it specifically to human beings.
As just one example, listen to the words of Psalm 104:30:

> When you send your Spirit, they are created, and you renew the face of the earth (Psalm 104:30).

In this verse, the psalmist expressed his understanding of the way everything in creation comes to exist. And he attributed everything to the Spirit of God, the Holy Spirit.
The Holy Spirit’s creative power in the natural world can also be seen through the many miracles he empowered in Scripture. For example, in the Old Testament, he enabled Moses to get water from a rock in Exodus 17:6. And he multiplied the widow’s flour and oil in 1 Kings 17. 
In the New Testament, he enabled Jesus to multiply food to feed five thousand people in Matthew 14, and four thousand people in Matthew 15. He raised Jesus from the dead, as we read in Romans 8:11. And he also empowered all of Paul’s miracles and ministry, as we learn in Romans 15:18-19. 
Of course, one of his greatest miracles was the incarnation, causing the Virgin Mary to become pregnant with Jesus. This particular miracle, recorded in Luke 1:35, is the only work of the Holy Spirit explicitly mentioned in the Apostles’ Creed.
Even today, the Holy Spirit has dramatic power to create, to renew, and to bring all of creation to the final state God intended for it. 
In fact, his renewal of the world won’t be finished until he completely reverses all the effects of humanity’s fall into sin. Genesis 3 tells us that when Adam and Eve ate the forbidden fruit from the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, God cursed them. And because humanity had been given authority as God’s vice-regents or representatives over the whole earth, God’s curse on Adam and Eve impacted the whole creation, including even the ground itself.
Since that time, the Holy Spirit has been working in the world to restore it and to bring it to its final state. And the result will be the new heavens and new earth that we read about in places like Isaiah 65:17 and 66:22, 2 Peter 3:13, and Revelation 21:1. 
Now that we have looked at the Holy Spirit’s creative power in the natural world, we are ready to see how he uses his creative power to provide spiritual gifts to the church.


#### Spiritual Gifts
	
When we speak of spiritual gifts we have in mind: 

> Abilities of supernatural origin that the Holy Spirit gives to individuals for the purpose of building up the church.
 
The Spirit creates these gifts by granting new abilities to people who previously lacked them, or by enhancing existing abilities beyond the natural talents or experience of the person who receives them. 

> Spiritual gifts in the New Testament are special, unique abilities, supernaturally given. I think it’s important to emphasize they are more than just talents. They are supernaturally given to every believer. Every believer has a spiritual gift or possibly spiritual gifts. 
> 
> —	Dr. Mark L. Strauss

Lists of the types of gifts the Holy Spirit gave to the early church appear in places like Romans 12, 1 Corinthians 12, and Ephesians 4. Some of these gifts resemble natural talents or universal human abilities. These are abilities that even people outside the church possess in some measure, simply because they are created in God’s image — things like wisdom, knowledge, serving, teaching, encouraging, generosity, leadership, and mercy. But other spiritual gifts obviously have direct supernatural origins, such as healing and miraculous powers. And still others lie somewhere on a continuum between the natural and the supernatural, such as prophecy, speaking in tongues, interpreting tongues, and discerning spirits. 
Now, all Christians agree that the Holy Spirit gives supernatural gifts to his church. But within this general agreement, there are a variety of nuanced views that fall somewhere along a scale. Some churches hold a cessationist position, believing that in the modern age the Holy Spirit only gives gifts that resemble natural talents. The more spectacular gifts are thought to have died out, perhaps after the apostolic age, or with the closing of the canon of Scripture.
Other churches hold to a continuationist position. They believe that the Spirit still gives all the same gifts that we find manifested in the New Testament. Within this position, there are many different viewpoints regarding which gifts any individual Christian can be expected to receive.
Between these two extremes, there are a variety of moderate views. Moderate churches tend to believe that the Holy Spirit can still give spectacular gifts when he wants to. But they do not insist that the Holy Spirit must always give every type of gift to his church. These churches emphasize the freedom of the Holy Spirit to act in any way at any time.
But one thing that all these positions have in common is the belief that the Holy Spirit continues to give at least some gifts to his people for the benefit of his church. Spiritual gifts are the power of God, and they are to be used for his people as a whole. They are not given to indulge the desires of individuals, or even to enhance the spiritual life of individuals. Rather, they are given to empower the church for ministry and to help it grow to maturity in Christ. We see this in Romans 12:4-5, 1 Corinthians 12:7, and Ephesians 4:7-16. As just one example, listen to what Paul wrote in 1 Corinthians 12:7:

> To each one the manifestation of the Spirit is given for the common good (1 Corinthians 12:7).

As Paul indicated here, spiritual gifts are given for the sake of the church. Gifted individuals may also benefit from their own gifts. But the primary goal and focus of gifting is the benefit of the church. They are creative works of power that the Holy Spirit uses to build up his church as a whole. 

> One of the most important things we know about spiritual gifts is that they should develop, be discovered and be used within the church, which is the body of Christ. Spiritual gifts are not given to an individual so that he or she may enjoy and benefit from them alone. They are given to build up groups of people, groups of believers, namely, the church of Jesus Christ. 
> 
> —	Dr. Riad Kassis, translation


> Spiritual gifts given to us by the Spirit are for the edification of the church, the building up of the church, for the doing of Christian ministry, for the encouragement of one another and carrying out the Great Commission. The primary focus that we have in our day, particularly with charismatic issues on tongues and prophesies, is really a secondary emphasis that we see in Scripture. We want to focus on spiritual gifts the way the New Testament does — that which gives us comfort, that which shows that the new covenant age has dawned, the personal work of the Spirit within us and corporately within its community, that which then carries out the work of ministry, individually, corporately, in the world. That emphasis is what we need to really be focusing on and seeing worked out in our own individual lives as well as the corporate life of the church as we live in the world. 
> 
> —	Dr. Stephen J. Wellum

With this understanding of how the Holy Spirit uses his creative power in the natural world and in providing spiritual gifts to the church, let’s look at how his power is manifested in the personal renewal of each believer’s spirit and heart.
