#### Personal Renewal
	
Scripture teaches that human beings are born in a state of spiritual death. As Romans 5:12-19 indicate, we are guilty of Adam’s sin, and liable unto death as a result. So, in order to save us from this predicament, the Holy Spirit creates new life in us by making our spirits live before God. The Bible talks about this new life in terms of regeneration and being born again. We read about this rebirth in John 3:3-8, Titus 3:5, 1 John 5:1-18, and several other places. As just one example, listen to Paul’s words in Titus 3:5:

> He saved us through the washing of rebirth and renewal by the Holy Spirit (Titus 3:5).

After we are regenerated, the Holy Spirit continues to work in us to change our thoughts, feelings and actions, in order to make us the kind of people that love and obey the Lord. The New Testament speaks of this in passages like Romans 8:1-16, 1 Corinthians 12:3, Galatians 5:16-25, and Philippians 2:13. Perhaps the most well-known discussion of the Holy Spirit’s transformative power is Paul’s description of the fruit that the Holy Spirit creates in the lives of believers. Listen to what Paul wrote in Galatians 5:22-23:

> The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness and self-control (Galatians 5:22-23).

All these changes in our character result from the active, creative power of the Holy Spirit as he conforms us to the image of Jesus Christ.
And of course, on the last day, the Holy Spirit will use his creative power to resurrect the physical bodies of all faithful Christians, giving us perfect, incorruptible bodies like the one Jesus already has. Listen to what Paul said about this in Romans 8:23:

> We ourselves, who have the firstfruits of the Spirit, groan inwardly as we wait eagerly for our adoption as sons, the redemption of our bodies (Romans 8:23).

When Paul said that followers of Christ have the firstfruits of the Spirit, he drew his language from the Old Testament practice of bringing offerings from the first harvest as representative of the entire harvest of that year. In much the same way, the Holy Spirit’s current work in believers is just the firstfruits of something much greater to come. The Holy Spirit’s work won’t be finished until he completely re-creates us, removing our curse and corruption, and restoring us to a pristine, sinless state. So far, the Spirit has given our spirit’s new life. But he will eventually re-create our bodies, too. 
Now that we have looked at the Holy Spirit’s works of creative power, we should turn our attention to his work of sanctification.


### SANCTIFICATION

When we speak of the Spirit’s work of sanctification, we are talking about the act of making people and things holy. This is the work the Spirit does to set people and things apart for God’s use, to purify them, and to make them fit to be near his unveiled glory. In many ways, this idea is closely related to the concept of renewal that we looked at in the last section of this lesson.
The Bible often says that the church is holy or sanctified by the presence and ministry of the Holy Spirit. We see this idea in places like Romans 15:16, 1 Corinthians 6:11, 2 Thessalonians 2:13 and 1 Peter 1:1-2. Listen to the way Paul talked about the Holy Spirit in 1 Corinthians 3:16-17:

> Do you not know that you are a temple of God and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? … [T]he temple of God is holy, and that is what you are (1 Corinthians 3:16-17, NASB).

In the Old Testament, the Jewish temple was God’s earthly palace where his special presence used to dwell. It was his house on earth, as Solomon proclaimed in 2 Chronicles 6:1. But in the New Testament, God no longer dwelled in the temple. Instead, the Holy Spirit sanctified the church as the new temple. This same idea is mentioned explicitly in Ephesians 2:22, and is echoed in other parts of Scripture.
The Holy Spirit is also said to sanctify individual believers by indwelling them. This is the idea that the Holy Spirit actually lives within the hearts of believers. This indwelling is mentioned in many places in Scripture, such as Romans 8:9-16, 1 Corinthians 6:19, 2 Timothy 1:14, and James 4:5. 

> The indwelling of the Holy Spirit is an essential reality for the believer. When God moves in and makes Christians new creatures in Christ, the Holy Spirit takes over in their lives. And it’s absolutely essential that we depend on him, rely on his indwelling power, or else we’re just living in the flesh. We’ve got to be able to tell the difference between living in the Spirit and living in the flesh because living in the Spirit is what enables us to glorify Christ in the way he wants us to. 
> 
> —	Dr. K. Erik Thoennes

This indwelling has several results. To list just a few, it purifies us from sin, it sets us apart for God, and we enjoy and benefit from the Spirit’s influence in our hearts and minds. Listen to the way Paul talked about these things in 1 Corinthians 6:9-11:

> The wicked will not inherit the kingdom of God … And that is what some of you were. But you were washed, you were sanctified, you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and by the Spirit of our God (1 Corinthians 6:9-11).

Through the sanctifying work of the Holy Spirit, believers have been purified and set apart for God, so that they are no longer counted among the wicked.
Have you ever stopped to think about how special it is that God himself lives inside you? The creator of the universe loves you so much that he has united you to himself for the rest of eternity. You do not teeter on the edge of his approval. You are hidden deep within his heart. And this relationship strengthens you against sin. It gives you the power to resist temptation, and to live in ways that please God. And when you do sin — no matter how bad it is — you are still acceptable in God’s sight. You are still fit to enter his presence to fellowship with him, to worship him, and of course, to ask for and to receive his forgiveness. 
So far, we’ve considered the Holy Spirit’s creative power and his work of sanctification. At this point, we’re ready to talk about the various ways that he administers divine grace.
