### GRACE

We’ll talk about the Holy Spirit’s administration of three types of grace: common grace, covenant grace, and saving grace. Let’s begin with common grace.


#### Common Grace

Common grace is the forbearance that God shows and the benefits that he gives to all humanity, regardless of their faith. The Holy Spirit does not give common grace to all people equally. Rather, he works here and there, according to his plans and desires.
For example, common grace is seen in the way that the Holy Spirit restrains sin in the world. Fallen unbelievers are controlled by sin, as Paul taught in Romans 8:1-8. They are hostile to God by nature, and they love sin. But as Paul taught throughout Romans 7–8, the Holy Spirit combats sin in the world. This is similar to the way he works in believers after he regenerates them. Although he does not grant a blessing this great to unbelievers, it is still true that he often restrains them so that they do not sin as greatly as they are able. 
Another aspect of common grace that is frequently seen in the world is the knowledge that unbelievers acquire, and the good things they are able to do with that knowledge. Unbelievers can learn many valuable truths that they use to benefit the church and its believers, along with the rest of humanity. And whenever anyone discovers something useful, that knowledge is a gracious gift from the Holy Spirit. 
John Calvin, the famous Protestant Reformer who lived from A.D. 1509 to 1564, described the Holy Spirit’s common gifts of knowledge in his work the Institutes of the Christian Religion, book 2, chapter 2, sections 15 and 16. Listen to what he wrote there:

> Whenever we come upon these matters in secular writers, let that admirable light of truth shining in them teach us that the mind of man, though fallen and perverted from its wholeness, is nevertheless clothed and ornamented with God’s excellent gifts. If we regard the Spirit of God as the sole fountain of truth, we will neither reject the truth itself, nor despise it wherever it shall appear, unless we wish to dishonor the Spirit of God … But if the Lord has willed that we be helped in physics, dialectic, mathematics, and other like disciplines, by the work and ministry of the ungodly, let us use their assistance. 


#### Covenant Grace
	
In many places in Scripture, we can see a second type of grace administered by the Holy Spirit that is sometimes called covenant grace.
Covenant grace consists of the forbearance and benefits that God gives to everyone that is part of his covenant people, even if they are not true believers. In the Old Testament, Israel was God’s covenant people because the whole nation was under God’s special covenants with Abraham, Moses and David. In the New Testament, God’s covenant people are the visible church which consists of people associated with the church even if they are not true believers. God’s covenant grace is even more abundant and forbearing than his common grace.
For example, God was very patient and merciful toward ancient Israel, even though Israel was often unfaithful to him, and sinned greatly against him. Because of God’s covenant with Israel, he did not destroy them as a nation, but always preserved a faithful remnant. Paul talked about this explicitly in Romans 11:1-5. Moreover, because of God’s covenant, even the unbelievers in ancient Israel received his blessings. Perhaps the greatest example of this is the Exodus from Egypt. Listen to what Moses wrote in Exodus 2:23-25:

> The Israelites groaned in their slavery and cried out, and their cry for help because of their slavery went up to God. God heard their groaning and he remembered his covenant with Abraham, with Isaac and with Jacob. So God looked on the Israelites and was concerned about them (Exodus 2:23-25).

Notice why God was concerned about Israel and rescued them. It was not because they were faithful to him, but because they were included in the covenant he had made with their forefathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. 
And the same thing is true in the church today. For example, everyone that is part of the church is regularly presented with the gospel and the opportunity to repent and be saved. And they share in those blessings that God grants to the church as a whole. In fact, unbelievers in the church even benefit from the spiritual gifts of the church, as we learn in Hebrews 6:4-6. This is why Hebrews 10:29 says that unbelievers in the church insult the Spirit of grace through their unfaithfulness.

> When we attend church, there are people there who are both saved and unsaved. Unsaved people benefit from what I would simply say is just being in the presence of Christians. That’s a good thing. What God makes of that, we can’t always tell. But just to be there is a good thing. John Calvin, talked about common grace; John Wesley, talked about the prevenient grace of God — that’s the way grace works in the life of a person before they consciously profess faith in Jesus Christ. So, that grace is at work, and I think probably in two major ways. One is, we become convicted of our sins. We come to see that sin is real, that sin damages us, but it also breaks the heart of God. You have to be in a place of grace to see that. And then, when that conviction of sin begins to operate in us, then we begin to be convinced, as some theologians have put it, that there is another way to live, that there is a better way to live. And so, I guess, for the unsaved person in particular, it’s just having the opportunity to see life from those vantage points, trusting that when they do God will work in their lives. 
> 
> —	Dr. Steve Harper


> It truly places them by God’s providence in the context in which they can hear the gospel, in which they may see the gospel lived, in which they may encounter what Jesus Christ, alive in the fellowship of a group of people, looks like. And therefore, in the sovereignty of God, perhaps that is his mechanism to bring someone before they are saved into the life of the church so that they can respond to the gospel. 
> 
> —	Dr. Steve Blakemore


#### Saving Grace

Finally, the third type of grace administered by the Holy Spirit is what many theologians call saving grace. 
Saving grace is the application of the eternal benefits of Christ’s perfect life, death, resurrection, ascension and glorious return to those who receive him as Lord and Savior. Every believer receives saving grace from the Holy Spirit. 
The blessings we receive as a result of the Holy Spirit’s administration of saving grace are already reserved for us on the basis of Jesus’ work. But we do not begin to receive their benefits until the Holy Spirit applies them to us. The most obvious of these blessings are things like regeneration, by which the Holy Spirit gives new life to our spirits, so that we are born again. We read about this in passages like John 3:5-8, Romans 8:2-11, and Titus 3:5. Repentance, forgiveness of sins and justification are also saving graces the Holy Spirit applies to us, as we see in Zechariah 2:10, 1 Corinthians 6:11, and Titus 3:5-8. The New Testament also speaks of salvation as a whole being applied to us by the Holy Spirit, as in 2 Thessalonians 2:13 and Titus 3:5.
When Christians talk about individual salvation, we tend to focus on Jesus Christ and his work. And, of course, this is a fine thing to do. But it’s also important to recognize the role the Holy Spirit plays. 

> Understanding what the Holy Spirit does in the believer makes for the fullest possible Christian life. The Holy Spirit motivates us, and that’s a key understanding, to realize that both the desire and the power to live for Christ comes from the Holy Spirit. This is part of that rich understanding of what the Holy Spirit does for us, that he’s the one who illumines us to understand the word of God. He is the one who gives us the spiritual appetites for the things of God, that we hunger for God, for the things of God, that we love the people of God, that we want to serve God. That takes a lot of the pressure off the individual. It takes a lot of pressure off the person of thinking: “It’s all up on my shoulders, God has told me what to do, now it’s up to me to do it, it’s up to me to obey.” Well, we do have the responsibility. God doesn’t obey for us, but we acknowledge that he does give us the desire and the power, the insight. It’s all to His glory. 
> 
> —	Dr. Donald S. Whitney

More than any other person of the Trinity, the Holy Spirit is active in our lives, making sure that we receive forgiveness, and joy, and goodness, and strength, and peace, and all the other blessings of salvation. So, if we want to receive these things in abundance, we should appeal to him for his saving grace. And beyond this, we need to honor the Spirit for his faithfulness and mercy. The saving grace he grants us makes him more than worthy of our thanks, our adoration, our worship, and our love.
Now that we have explored the Holy Spirit’s works of creative power, sanctification and grace, we are ready to look at his works of revelation.
