### REVELATION

The Holy Spirit is generally identified as the person of the Trinity who is the agent of revelation, testimony and understanding. We see this in John 14:26, 1 Corinthians 2:4,10, Ephesians 3:5, and many other places. In fact, the association between the Spirit and revelation is so close that the Holy Spirit is actually called the Spirit of truth in passages like John 14:17, 15:26, and 16:13. And in 1 John 5:6, John went so far as to say that:

> The Spirit is the truth (1 John 5:6).

In a similar way, Paul summed up the Spirit’s role in Ephesians 1:17 by calling him:

> The Spirit of wisdom and revelation (Ephesians 1:17).

We’ll speak of three aspects of the Spirit’s work of revelation. First, we’ll talk about general revelation. Second, we’ll look at special revelation. And third, we’ll focus on illumination and inward leading. Let’s look first at general revelation.


#### General Revelation

General revelation is: God’s use of the natural world and its workings to make his existence, nature, presence, actions and will known to all humanity. 
Scripture speaks of general revelation in many places, such as Psalms 8 and 19, and Romans 1–2. For example, Romans 1:20 speaks of general revelation in this way:

> Since the creation of the world God's invisible qualities — his eternal power and divine nature — have been clearly seen, being understood from what has been made, so that men are without excuse (Romans 1:20).

Scripture often says that general revelation is delivered through the Holy Spirit’s works of creative power in nature — both in the act of creation itself, and in sustaining what has been created. All these works flow from the Spirit’s will and character. So, as we recognize his hand in them, they teach us about his nature and intentions.

> The Holy Spirit’s role in general revelation is quite significant and important because, of course, he is the agent of creation. He is the one who is still involved in upholding God’s laws — “natural laws” we sometimes say. And this is a revelation that the Holy Spirit gives to all people without distinction, which is different, of course, to what we sometimes call the “special revelation,” whereby we come to know Jesus as Lord and Savior because of his internal work in our heart. But general revelation is something that is available to all of God’s creatures. 
> 
> —	Rev. Dr. Simon Vibert


> God tells us that the heavens declare the glory of God. So everywhere we turn our eye we can see a demonstration of God’s power, his wisdom, his goodness, all around us in creation. The Holy Spirit takes these revelations of God and brings them home to us in powerful ways, so we have to come to terms with our creator. 
> 
> —	Dr. K. Erik Thoennes


#### Special Revelation

In addition to providing general revelation to the world, the Holy Spirit provides special revelation, primarily to the church.
Special revelation is: God’s direct involvement, or his use of messengers, to make his existence, nature, presence, actions and will known to limited portions of humanity.
The Holy Spirit has provided special revelation in the form of Scripture, prophecies, dreams, visions, angelic visitations, and other unusual media. Special revelation is given primarily to special people or groups, particularly those who receive God’s offer of salvation. In the Old Testament, special revelation was given mostly to Abraham and his descendants. And in the New Testament, it was given to the church. Like spiritual gifts, special revelation is for the benefit of all God’s people, in order to convert and build up everyone in the faith.
The greatest special revelation the Holy Spirit ever gave us was the incarnation of Jesus Christ himself. Hebrews 1 praises our Lord as the pinnacle of all God’s revelation. And even now, the Holy Spirit continues to point us to Christ through the inspired Scriptures, which contain the words of Christ from all ages, relayed to us through his authoritative prophets and apostles.
The Holy Spirit’s authorship of Scripture is mentioned in passages like Matthew 22:43, Mark 12:36, Acts 1:16, 4:25, and 2 Timothy 3:16-17. As just one example, listen to what Peter wrote in 2 Peter 1:20-21:

> No prophecy of Scripture came about by the prophet's own interpretation. For prophecy never had its origin in the will of man, but men spoke from God as they were carried along by the Holy Spirit (2 Peter 1:20-21).

Since the apostolic age, the Spirit no longer inspires new Scripture. But the special revelation he has provided in the Old and New Testaments continues to reveal his will to Christians in every age.
Third, in addition to providing general revelation and special revelation, the Holy Spirit also works through the illumination and inward leading of individuals.


#### Illumination and Inward Leading
	
> We read in 2 Peter 1:21 that Old Testament prophets spoke from God as they were carried along by the Holy Spirit, which implies that the Holy Spirit, given to the church, will enlighten us to understand what he inspired in the prophets. There’s no new revelation, but if we’re to understand existing revelation we must be enlightened and empowered by the Sprit of God. 
> 
> —	Dr. Knox Chamblin
	
Illumination is a divine gift of knowledge or understanding that is primarily cognitive, such as the knowledge that Jesus is the Messiah, which Peter received in Matthew 16:17. 
And inward leading is a divine gift of knowledge or understanding that is primarily emotive or intuitive. It includes things such as our conscience, and the sense that God would have us take a particular course of action.
Illumination and inward leading are not always clearly distinguished from each other in the Bible. Often, Scripture speaks in ways that apply equally to both. We find passages like this in 1 Corinthians 2:9-16, Ephesians 1:17, Colossians 1:9, and 1 John 2:27. For example in Ephesians 1:17, Paul spoke this way:

> I keep asking that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the glorious Father, may give you the Spirit of wisdom and revelation, so that you may know him better (Ephesians 1:17).

Here, Paul called the Holy Spirit “the Spirit of wisdom and revelation.” In terms of the categories of illumination and inward leading, we might be tempted to see wisdom as inward leading and revelation as illumination. And this may be what Paul had in mind. On the other hand, he may simply have been referring to both works of the Spirit collectively, without drawing a clear distinction between them.

> We, all of us, need the illumination of the Spirit because we, all of us, are spiritually blind without it. We are blind spiritually in the way that bats are blind physically, I mean, they can’t look at the sun. So, when the sun is shining, they simply hang by their feet from the roof of the cave where they hide out during the day. They can only see when they come out at night. Well, we are in the position of bats during the day. God’s light is shining, but because of what sin has done in messing up our spiritual faculties, we are not able to discern the reality of God and his word. We may have a smudgy awareness that God is there somehow, but we don’t appreciate that Scripture commands are for us; Scripture promises are for us. The scriptural presentation of the Lord Jesus is setting in before us for us to trust him and enter into the new life. The New Testament says, picturesquely, we are blind at that point, we are deaf at that point, our hearts are hard at that point, so that the Word of God makes no impression on us at all. And then, the New Testament says, that God, I’m quoting now from 2 Corinthians 4, “God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness,” that’s back in creation of course, “has shone in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.” That’s the illumination of the Spirit, and when that illumination is given to us, we see Christ spiritually, we discern his reality, we hear and realize that he is calling us to himself. 
> 
> —	Dr. J. I. Packer

Illumination and inward leading are normal means the Holy Spirit uses to teach his people the truths he has revealed. Accordingly, there are at least three things we can do to benefit from this ministry in our lives. First, we can commit ourselves to studying the Bible, knowing that when we do, the Holy Spirit will often guide our understanding. Second, we can dedicate ourselves to prayer, continually asking the Holy Spirit for guidance, wisdom, understanding, and the will to obey. And third, we can devote ourselves to righteous and holy living, being determined to live according to the truths the Spirit teaches us. 
