	
# Theological Foundations – Module Two – God the Father
## Discussion Questions 

1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	Why do Christians say that the God of the Bible is the one and only true God?


3.	Define and describe God’s unlimited and matchless power.


4.	Discuss the Father’s role as Maker in the work of creation.


5.	How is the universe God’s good creation that reflects his good character?


6.	Explain God’s authority over creation as absolute, exclusive, and exhaustive.


7.	What things in your life tempt you to value them as highly as you value God?



8.	How does the beauty and goodness of creation help us see the goodness and beauty of God?


9.	What effects of the curse are evident in the natural world and human society?


10.	In what practical ways does it help you to remember that God is “father”?


11.	In what ways does it help you to remember that God is “almighty”?
12.	How do you feel about other religions? Do you think the differences are important?  Do you think someone can be saved if they believe in another religion?




 
REVIEW STATEMENT on FATHER ALMIGHTY - PERSON: We can view the Trinity from the perspective of God’s being or essence (ontological Trinity), in which all three persons have the same divine attributes and are equal in power and glory. We can also view the Trinity from the perspective of how the individual persons relate to each other (economic Trinity), in which each person has different responsibilities, a different level of authority, and a different role with different tasks to perform.
CASE STUDY: Bob was a new Christian. After a year of being in the church, he was in a Sunday school class about prayer. The teacher said that Christians can pray to any member of the Trinity because they are all equally God and because they are also one. But Bob wasn't so sure. He said, "Sure, you can pray to anyone, but I'm praying to the Father because he's the one in charge. If you want something done, you need to talk to the boss." Angela, also a new Christian, was in the same class. She said, "But I'd rather pray to the Spirit because he's with me. The Father seems too distant."
## REFLECTION QUESTIONS
1.	How do people in your culture tend to view the different roles of the members of the Trinity? Do they view all members of the Trinity as equal even though they have different roles, or do they (for all practical purposes) rank the members of the Trinity in importance according to their roles? Do they give preference to one over the other? Elaborate
2.	How do you tend to view the different roles of the members of the Trinity? Do you view all members of the Trinity as equal even though they have different roles, or do you (for all practical purposes) rank them in importance according to their roles? Do you give preference to one over the other? Why or why not? 
3.	Even though the Holy Spirit points away from himself to Christ (John 15:26), we should honor him for this as part of his role (John 16:13-14). What are your thoughts about this? How is it a good model for us to follow?
4.	Discuss the following in your learning community:
a.	How do different roles and equality go together in the Trinity and in creation?
b.	How does the nature of the Trinity — with its equality and different roles — help us understand the ideal nature of authority relationships in creation?
c.	How are authority relationships in creation distorted by sin?
## Action Assignments
•	As you spend time in prayer this week, do not, in your heart, give preference to one member of the Trinity over another. Honor the members of the Trinity according to their equality and according to their equally glorious but different roles.
•	If you are a leader with authority — whether as a husband, a pastor, an elder, or at work — examine whether or not you are using your role to promote or glorify yourself or to think of yourself as better than those under your authority. Spend time with the Lord and ask God for wisdom and humility. Leadership is a role the Lord has given you, not a means of feeling important.
