# The Gospels
# Lesson Five
# The Gospel According to John

## INTRODUCTION

Her name is Sophia. Well, it isn’t her real name. It’s the name she uses to hide from friends and family members who threaten to kill her because she now believes in Jesus. Sophia comes from a background where believing in Jesus sometimes brings persecution. That’s true today in many parts of the world, and it was also true in the first century. In the days of the apostle John, Jewish believers were being thrown out of the synagogues because they believed that Jesus was the fulfillment of God’s ancient promises to their forefathers. They were being cut off from their families, their history and their religion. John wrote to assure these persecuted believers that Jesus really is the Christ, the Son of God. He wanted to make sure that even in their harsh circumstances they would remain faithful to Jesus and enjoy abundant life in him. 
This is the fifth lesson in our series The Gospels. In this series, we’re exploring the four books of the Bible that tell us how Jesus brought God’s kingdom and glory into earth’s history. This lesson is entitled “The Gospel According to John.” In this lesson, we’ll study John’s gospel in a way that helps us read it with greater understanding, love God more deeply, and enjoy our lives in Christ more fully. 
In our lesson, we’ll study John’s gospel in three important ways. First, we’ll consider the background of John’s gospel. Second, we’ll explore the structure and content of John’s gospel. Third, we will look at the major themes of John’s gospel. We’ll begin by studying the background of John’s gospel.

