## BACKGROUND
	
We’ll explore the background of John’s gospel by considering the author and the occasion of writing. Let us begin with the authorship of John’s gospel.


### AUTHOR

Throughout church history, Christians have consistently attributed this gospel to Jesus’ disciple John, the brother of James, the son of Zebedee. John was one of the inner circle of Jesus’ most trusted companions, and a pillar of faith in the early Christian community. His New Testament writings include not only the fourth gospel, but also the letters 1, 2 and 3 John, and the book of Revelation. 
	We’ll study the authorship of John’s gospel in two stages. First, we’ll see that the traditional view that the apostle John wrote this gospel is reliable. And second, we’ll explore John’s personal history. Let’s start by looking at the traditional view that the apostle John was the author of the fourth gospel.


#### Traditional View
	
> The Gospel of John is one of the books in the Bible that simply doesn’t say who wrote it. And that’s where we start, I think. As Bible-believing Christians, we just acknowledge the fact we don’t have a definitive statement as to who authored the book. By the second century, Tertullian and Irenaeus and some others were definitely attributing it to the apostle John. So, you have to ask the question why did they believe it so close to the time that they either had contact with some of the last living apostles or at least the next generation for them to come out as strongly as they did. And there were others who did as well. Then you go inside the gospel. You have to look at the internal evidence in the book, and there, of course, you’ve got the eyewitness accounts where whoever is writing the book is writing about a story that they were present when it happened. For example, in the Lord’s Supper, the person is at the table, the beloved disciple is sitting at the table with Jesus and that’s a very powerful thing. 
> 
> —	Dr. Steve Harper

We can affirm that John most likely wrote the fourth gospel because of three types of early evidence. First, we will consider the ancient manuscripts of John’s gospel.

Manuscripts. Many ancient manuscripts of the fourth gospel list the author’s name as John. For example, Papyrus 66 and Papyrus 75, both dated around A.D. 200, call the gospel euangelion kata Iōannēn, meaning “Gospel According to John.” And Codex Sinaiticus and Codex Vaticanus, both written in the middle of the fourth century A.D., call it simply kata Iōannēn, meaning “according to John.”
	Of course, John wasn’t an uncommon name. But it’s clear from the writings of the early church that this attribution was intended to refer to the most significant “John” mentioned in the Scriptures, namely the apostle John.
	Not only do the ancient manuscripts indicate that John wrote the fourth gospel, but the internal evidence from the gospel itself leads to the conclusion that John is its most likely author.

Internal Evidence. The writer of the gospel reported debates between Jesus and the Jewish leadership on particular points of Jewish law. These debates show that the author had a strong understanding of Jewish law just as John, the apostle, would have had as a Palestinian Jew.
	Going a step further, there is strong evidence that the author of this gospel actually was a Palestinian Jew. The Palestinian character of the gospel is seen in the descriptions of Jesus’ ministry. For example, in 7:15 he noted the importance of religious training in the eyes of Palestinian Jewish leaders.
	The author of the fourth gospel also mentioned religious themes and used vocabulary that was similar to other writings from first century Palestinian Judaism. For example, a number of scholars have pointed out similarities in language between John’s gospel and the writings at Qumran, commonly known as the Dead Sea Scrolls. For instance, the expression “the sons of light” appears both in the Qumran documents and in John 12:36. And the phrase “the light of life” appears both in the writings from Qumran and in John 8:12. Similarities like these indicate that the author of the fourth gospel was very much at home in the religious conversation of first century Palestine.
	Not only does the text of the gospel give the impression that it was written by a Palestinian Jew, but it also gives the impression that it was written by an eyewitness. This fits the profile of John the apostle, because he himself was an eyewitness to the life of Jesus. We see evidence that the writer was an eyewitness in many places. For example, after Jesus’ death, John 19:35 says this:

> The man who saw it has given testimony, and his testimony is true. He knows that he tells the truth, and he testifies so that you also may believe (John 19:35).

Here the author clearly indicated that he was an eyewitness to Jesus’ death. And we find a similar claim in John 21:20-24, which identifies this eyewitness by calling him “the disciple whom Jesus loved,” indicating that the writer had a close personal relationship with Jesus. 

> Think about what it was like for John at the Last Supper when he laid his head on the bosom of Jesus. Think about that closeness that had to exist between those two men. And even on the cross when Jesus is dying, he gives the care of his mother not to his brothers and sisters but to the apostle John. Again, there had to be a very deep, intimate relationship between those two men. And even in the self-description, John describes himself, again, not in arrogance, not in pride, as the disciple whom Jesus loved. 
> 
> —	Dr. Thaddeus J. James, Jr.

This “disciple whom Jesus loved” is mentioned several times in John’s gospel. For example, according to John 13:23, the beloved disciple reclined next to Jesus at the Last Supper. In 19:26-27, Jesus spoke to this beloved disciple from the cross, and entrusted the care of his mother to him. This same disciple ran to the tomb with Peter on the resurrection morning in 20:2-8. And in 21:7, the beloved disciple was the first to recognize Jesus on the shore.

> The apostle John is never mentioned by name in the gospel that he wrote because he prefers to identify himself as the one whom Jesus loves. And in doing that, he pretty much articulates, or reveals his humility in one sense, and then a celebration of his relationship with his Lord in another sense. As you read the gospel, it’s kind of interesting and telling while he would make mention of all the other disciples, he never refers to, you know, his own name. 
> 
> —	Rev. Larry Cockrell

Not once in the gospel is John referred to by name. And it’s surprising that a person who is mentioned so often in the other gospels is never named in this one. The most likely explanation is that John was the beloved disciple that wrote this gospel, and that out of humility he refrained from even mentioning his own name. Instead, he focused on the fact that he never would have been a follower of Jesus except for the amazing divine love the Savior had for him.
	Not only does the fourth gospel itself lend great support to the belief that John is its most likely author but the writings of the early church confirmed that conclusion.

Early Church. By A.D. 170 to 190 the conviction that the fourth gospel had been written by the apostle John was firmly established in the church. Clement of Alexandria, Tertullian, and Irenaeus all affirmed that John, the son of Zebedee, was the author. Around A.D. 325 the church historian Eusebius provided the following quote from Irenaeus in his work Ecclesiastical History, book 5, chapter 8, section 4:

**Then John, the disciple of the Lord, who had even rested on his breast, himself also gave forth the gospel, while he was living at Ephesus in Asia.**

The testimony of Irenaeus is particularly important for at least two reasons. First, according to Eusebius, Irenaeus had been a disciple of Polycarp, the bishop of Smyrna. And according to a letter from the church of Smyrna regarding the martyrdom of their bishop, Polycarp himself had been a disciple of the apostle John. So, Irenaeus could have learned about John’s authorship from a trustworthy man that knew John personally. Second, Irenaeus traveled widely in the ancient church, and therefore was familiar with many other bits of information that could have informed his understanding of the authorship of the fourth gospel.
	It’s also significant that there was no real opposition to John as the author. Nowhere in the writings of the ancient church is there ever any suggestion of an author for the gospel other than John, the son of Zebedee. In fact, history records only two groups that opposed John’s gospel: the Alogoi and the Marcionites. And while they rejected the teachings of John’s gospel, it’s not entirely clear that even they denied his authorship. 
	Although it might not be possible to prove beyond all doubt that this anonymous gospel was written by John, the most convincing position continues to be the ancient tradition that John the apostle is the author.
Now that we’ve considered the traditional view that John wrote the fourth gospel, and seen that it’s compelling, let’s look at John’s personal history.
