#### Personal History

We actually know more about John than we do about most of Jesus’ other disciples. John is referred to in the Gospels with his brother James as “the sons of Zebedee.” John is also mentioned second, implying that he was the younger of the two. According to Mark 1:14-21, the family fishing business was near Capernaum on the Sea of Galilee. According to verse 20, the business was prosperous enough to employ others. After Jesus’ death, the business was still strong enough for them to go back to it according to John 21:1 14.
	A comparison of Mark 15:40 and Matthew 27:56 indicates that their mother’s name was Salome and that she also followed Jesus at least some of the time. At one time she asked Jesus to give her sons preferential treatment in his kingdom, according to Matthew 20:21. Going a step further, a comparison of John 19:25 and Matthew 27:56 may indicate that Salome, the mother of the sons of Zebedee, was actually the sister of Mary the mother of Jesus. This would have made John the cousin of Jesus. If this was true it helps explain why Jesus speaking from the cross in John 19:25-27 asked John to take care of his mother.
	In Mark 3:17, James and John were called “Sons of Thunder.” This seems to be a reference to their fiery temperament. As just one example, Luke reported an occasion when Jesus had tried to find overnight lodging in a Samaritan city. When the residents refused to allow Jesus and his disciples to stay, James and John reacted with strong anger. Listen to Luke 9:54-56:

> When the disciples James and John saw this, they asked, “Lord, do you want us to call fire down from heaven to destroy them?” But Jesus turned and rebuked them, and they went to another village (Luke 9:54-56).

It seems that during his time with Jesus, John’s emotions were often close to the surface and only a moment from bursting forth. It’s striking that he ultimately became the New Testament writer that, more than any other, focused on the love of God and the love of God’s people.
	Some critics have thought that the more compassionate nature of the fourth gospel contradicts the portrait of John in the other gospels. But two lines of thinking make it clear that there is no contradiction. First, the story of John is the story of a man changed by the love of God. Being loved by Jesus changed John into the apostle of love. Second, when God changed the intense and emotional John he did not change him into an unemotional shell of a human being. He changed him into an intensely emotional preacher of the gospel of love. God redirected and used the core of his being, but did not eradicate that core.
	In the narrative of the gospels, John is a member of the inner circle of disciples along with Peter and James. Only they were with Jesus at critical events like his transfiguration, and his prayers in Gethsemane on the night of his arrest. In the book of Acts, Peter and John are the two leaders of the disciples. And in Galatians 2:9, Paul called John one of the pillars of the church in Jerusalem.
	In the early Church, Irenaeus and many other sources reported John’s lengthy ministry in Ephesus after he left Jerusalem. There is also a strong tradition that John was eventually exiled to the Island of Patmos. According to some sources, he was later freed from his exile and returned to Ephesus, dying there during the reign of Emperor Trajan, near the end of the first century.
Now that we have affirmed the traditional view that John wrote the fourth gospel, and have become familiar with a little of John’s personal history, let’s explore the occasion for the authorship of John’s gospel.


### OCCASION

We will explore the occasion of the authorship of John’s gospel in four ways. First, we will consider the geographical location of both the audience and the writer. Second, we will look a little more closely at the identity of the original audience. Third, we will consider the date of authorship. And fourth, we’ll think about the purpose of the gospel. Let’s begin by looking at the location of John’s gospel.


#### Location

It’s most likely that John wrote his gospel while he was in Ephesus, and that he wrote it for an audience that lived outside Palestine, perhaps in Asia Minor. We can’t know these things for certain, but there are several factors that support these conclusions. For instance, John’s comments about Palestinian Jewish customs points to an audience that lived outside Palestine. Listen to what John wrote in John 4:9:

The Samaritan woman said to him, “You are a Jew and I am a Samaritan woman. How can you ask me for a drink?” (For Jews do not associate with Samaritans.) (John 4:9).

In this verse, John included a comment to his readers about the hostility between the Jews and the Samaritans. This hostility would have been well known to everyone in Palestine, so John’s comment indicates that his readers lived somewhere else. 
	The writings of the ancient church also suggest that the gospel was written primarily to people outside Palestine. Earlier we cited Eusebius who quoted Irenaeus saying that John wrote this gospel in Ephesus in Asia Minor. Almost all of the ancient church agreed with this conclusion, including Irenaeus, Polycrates, Clement of Alexandria, and Justin Martyr. Moreover, no ancient source ever suggests that any group other than residents of Asia Minor were its intended recipients.
	There is also a close connection between John’s gospel and the book of Revelation. John wrote the book of Revelation, and his audience was definitely in Asia Minor — all seven of the churches addressed by the letters in Revelation chapters 2–3 are in Asia Minor. And the striking parallels between John and Revelation create a strong presumption of a similar audience. For example, John’s gospel has a powerful strand of teaching related to the conflict between converts to Christianity and the Jewish synagogues. And the book of Revelation also acknowledges this problem. Listen to what the Lord said to his church in Revelation 2:9 and 3:9:

> I know the slander of those who say they are Jews and are not, but are a synagogue of Satan … I will make those who are of the synagogue of Satan, who claim to be Jews though they are not, but are liars — I will make them come and fall down at your feet and acknowledge that I have loved you (Revelation 2:9; 3:9).

From a different perspective, we know from Acts 19:1-7 that followers of John the Baptist continued in Ephesus at least until that time. If the apostle John wrote to an audience that included John the Baptist’s followers, this might explain the gospel’s clear stress that John the Baptist subordinated himself to Jesus.
	Although certainty in the matter is impossible, it seems most likely that John was in Ephesus when he wrote his gospel and that it was shaped in part by the circumstances in Asia Minor.
Now that we’ve suggested that the location where the gospel was written was most likely Ephesus, let’s consider more closely the character of that original audience to whom John wrote.


#### Audience

Like all the gospels, there is a sense in which the Gospel of John was intended for the whole church throughout the ages. It has infinite value for all of God’s people. But there are also parts of John’s gospel that seem to have had special relevance for the church in a particular place and time. At least in parts of the gospel, John appears to have had in mind members of a Jewish community who had come to believe that Jesus was the Messiah, but who had continued to worship in the synagogue, or to have other significant contacts with the Jewish community. In fact, almost the entire central part of the gospel, from chapter 5–12, deals with the intense conflict between Jesus and the Jews. 
	This conflict is also highlighted by John’s use of the phrase “the Jews,” which John used more than 70 times, but which appears less than 20 times in the other three gospels combined. In most instances John used this term to refer to the religious leaders who set themselves against Jesus. 
	By contrast, when John spoke positively about the Old Testament people of God, he typically used words like “Israel” or “Israelite.” For instance, in John 1:47, Jesus called Nathanael “a true Israelite in whom there is nothing false.”
	John also used the Greek word Christ more often than any other gospel writer. The term “Christ” translates both the Greek word Christos and the Hebrew word Mashiach, both of which mean anointed one. The Christ was God’s anointed Redeemer who was to rescue Israel from their sins and free them from foreign rule. 
	The term “Christ” would have been especially important to Jewish Christians because the focus of the differences between the synagogue and the growing Christian church was the belief that Jesus was the Christ, the long-awaited savior of God’s people that had been prophesied in the Old Testament.

> The Jewish Messiah only came to be designated by the term “messiah” much later, but the promise for a seed of the woman who would defeat evil — Satan and his seed — is made in Genesis 3:15. So, from the beginning forward, the seed of the woman, it’s later clarified that he’s also going to be the seed of Abraham, and then it’s clarified that he’ll be the seed of Judah, and these promises to the serpent that he’s going to be judged, and Abraham that through his descendant all the nations will be blessed, and then to Judah that the ruler staff will never depart from his feet. These promises are eventually woven together in the Balaam oracles, and from what God’s program is at the beginning, the Messiah is to defeat evil and ultimately reopen the way to the Garden of Eden and cause the dry lands to be covered with the glory of Yahweh as the waters cover the sea.   
> 
> —	Dr. James M. Hamilton

The topics addressed by John and the way in which he addressed them shows that his primary readers were Jewish Christians that were struggling as followers of Jesus. But like all Scripture, the Holy Spirit also intended John’s book to be used by the entire church throughout the ages. And in fact, in John 1:41 and 4:25, John even translated the Hebrew term “messiah” for the Gentiles in his audience. And of course, history has proven that John’s gospel is of great value both to Jewish and Gentile believers. 
Now that we’ve looked at both the location and audience of the gospel, let’s consider the date of its composition.
