#### Date

In general, we can say that John most likely wrote between A.D. 85 and 90. Several factors make it likely that the gospel was not written before A.D. 85. First, John is the only gospel that does not include predictions of the destruction of Jerusalem and the temple, which took place in A.D. 70. This is probably because a significant period of time had passed since that cataclysmic event.
	Second, the gospel reflects a time when the split between the church and the synagogue was most bitter. After the fall of Jerusalem, Judaism became more rigid. Defending itself against heresy the daily synagogue prayers were revised to include a curse on heretics such as those who believed that Jesus was the Son of God; and formal excommunication became more frequent. This tension is prefigured in passages like John 9, where John reported the excommunication of the blind man Jesus had healed. Listen to John’s comment on this situation in John 9:22:

> The Jews had decided that anyone who acknowledged that Jesus was the Christ would be put out of the synagogue (John 9:22).

In this passage, to be put out of the synagogue was to be excommunicated, excluded from the life of the Jewish community.
	Third, it seems that the Gospel of John was written after the other three gospels. This view goes back at least to the fourth-century historian Eusebius. According to him, John intended his gospel to supplement the others, especially with information on Jesus’ ministry prior to the arrest of John the Baptist. Listen to what Eusebius wrote in Ecclesiastical History, book 3, chapter 24, section 12:

> John accordingly, in his gospel, records the deeds of Christ which were performed before the Baptist was cast into prison, but the other three evangelists mention the events which happened after that time.
> 
> 
> Anyone reading through the four gospels is immediately struck by the fact that you have three gospels: Matthew, Mark, and Luke that look very similar to each other; many the same stories; same basic structure in terms of the ministry of Jesus. Then you’ve got the fourth gospel, the Gospel of John, that is radically different. John’s gospel appears to be written fairly late in the first century, when the church was facing new challenges from the outside world; from their Jewish opponents; from their secular opponents as well. And those challenges were certainly related in one sense to the person of Jesus, who he was. The deity of Jesus was clearly under fire because John’s gospel so strongly stresses that Jesus is, in fact, divine. The Synoptic Gospels, that’s not a big issue because evidently it wasn’t being challenged. The other thing is there is false teaching arising in the church, and so John’s gospel seems to address that issue of false teaching. The other thing, the third thing, is that Jewish opponents, there really clearly has been a clear break by that time between the Christians and the Jews; a break we don’t yet see really fully in the Synoptic Gospels, in Matthew, Mark, and Luke. 
> 
> —	Dr. Mark L. Strauss

All this leads to the conclusion that the ancient tradition of the church was probably correct and that the gospel was written late in John’s life, probably after A.D. 85.
If John, the son of Zebedee, is the author of this gospel then the latest possible date for John’s gospel is determined by his lifespan. John was a young man when he began to follow Jesus, probably around A.D. 30. Even if John had been in his late teens at that time, he would have been almost 80 years old by A.D. 90. Living much longer than that would have been very doubtful.
	That A.D. 85 or 90 is the latest date possible for John to have written the gospel agrees with the manuscript evidence. The oldest manuscript containing any portion of the New Testament is designated Papyrus 52, also called the Rylands Papyrus. This fragment contains a part of John 18.
	Papyrus 52 is dated between A.D. 100 and 150. Assuming this small fragment was originally part of a complete gospel, it indicates that the gospel was written early enough to have been distributed fairly widely by the early part of the second century.
Other manuscripts of the gospel from later in the second century have also been found. These manuscripts are all Egyptian in origin, and represent different manuscript traditions. It is doubtful that this geographical transport from Asia Minor to Egypt, as well as the diversification of manuscript tradition, could have taken place in less than 40 or 50 years. So, it seems reasonable to set the latest possible date for the writing of John’s gospel around A.D. 90 or 100. 
Now that we’ve considered the location, audience, and date of John’s gospel, let’s focus on John’s purpose for writing his gospel.


#### Purpose

\All books of substantial size in the New Testament have complex purposes, and John’s gospel is no different. Just as Jesus dealt with a substantial number of themes during his ministry, John’s record of Jesus’ ministry also addresses many subjects. But it’s still possible to describe these purposes in a unified manner. In fact, John himself summarized his purpose for us. Specifically, he said that he wanted to confirm the belief that Jesus was both the Christ and the Son of God. Listen to what he wrote in John 20:30-31:

> Jesus did many other miraculous signs in the presence of his disciples, which are not recorded in this book. But these are written that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that by believing you may have life in his name (John 20:30-31).

Simply put, John wrote so that his audience would believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, in order that they would receive the benefits that come with believing this gospel message. 

> John is pretty explicit as to the reason for the writing of the gospel. In John 20:31, he states that these things were written that we may know that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing we may have eternal life in him. Now that is a twofold, let’s say, purpose that’s stated there. First and foremost, it has to do with his gospel being evangelistic in nature. Obviously, he has written so that his readers would exercise at some point in time, as the Lord drew them, faith in himself. Then secondly, it is apologetic in nature. He also wanted to convince his readers that Jesus indeed was the incarnate God-man. 
> 
> —	Rev. Larry Cockrell


> John is saying, I’m writing this gospel so that you may know the identity of Jesus. Jesus is the Son of God. And he explains who the Son of God is, that he’s the Word who was with the Father and became flesh, that Jesus is the promised Messiah, and this is not just some abstract information that we assent to, but he says, I want you to have trusting reliance upon this so that you may have the life that the Father’s freely giving through him. 
> 
> —	Dr. Robert L. Plummer

Throughout his gospel, the central focus of John’s purpose was to promote belief in Jesus as both the Messiah and the Son of God. These were the two points on which Jewish Christians needed the most support in their conflicts with the synagogue. They had come to believe in Jesus as the Christ and the Son of God, and they needed to persevere in this belief if they were to receive the blessings of salvation. Of course, there is also a sense in which John’s gospel is for all believers. For example, in John 13–17 John tried to nurture the faith of all believers by stressing that even though Jesus was no longer walking on the earth, he was a present reality in the lives of his people through the Holy Spirit. All of John’s teaching was aimed at enriching the lives of all believers.
	Scholars have said that John’s gospel is “a pool in which babes wade and elephants swim.” Its basic message is clear and simple: Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God. But the details of this basic message continue to challenge interpreters who have studied the gospel for years.
	The first Christians that read this gospel would have been deeply encouraged by it. It would have taught them to persevere in their Christian faith despite their conflicts with their opponents. And it would have challenged them to grow in their love and awe for the Christ who was their only source for abundant life. And John’s gospel provides these same encouragements and challenges to modern Christians, too.
	Now that we have studied the background of John’s gospel, let’s turn to the structure and content of the gospel.
