## STRUCTURE AND CONTENT

Scholars have described the structure of John’s gospel in a variety of ways. In this lesson, we’ll follow those that have suggested a connection between John’s introductory summary of Jesus’ life and ministry, and the content of John’s book. Listen to these words from John 1:10-14:

> [Jesus] was in the world, and though the world was made through him, the world did not recognize him. He came to that which was his own, but his own did not receive him. Yet to all who received him, to those who believed in his name, he gave the right to become children of God ... We have seen his glory, the glory of the One and Only, who came from the Father, full of grace and truth (John 1:10-14).

This passage focuses on four main ideas: Jesus came into the world; he came and was rejected by his own people, namely Israel; those who received and believed in him became children of God; and then those believers became witnesses for Jesus. Following those four main ideas, we’ll outline John’s gospel in this way:
* First, John opened his gospel with a brief introduction that described Jesus’ incarnation in 1:1-18.
* Second, John recorded Jesus’ public ministry in 1:19–12:50, where he showed that Jesus came to his own creation and was rejected by the human race he had come to save. 
* Third, John included a description of Jesus’ private ministry to those who had received and believed in him in 13:1–20:31. 
* And fourth, in the conclusion to John’s gospel in 21:1-25, John highlighted the role of the apostles and other disciples as witnesses to Jesus’ glory. 

	We’ll look at each of these parts of the Gospel According to John, beginning with its introduction.
	

### INTRODUCTION

In 1:1-18 John powerfully and beautifully summarized the whole gospel. He taught that Jesus is the Word of God who created all things and is the source of all life. But more than this, Jesus also came into the world as a true human being of flesh and blood. And as God incarnate, he revealed the Father’s glory to the world he had created. 
	John described this in John 1:4-5 by saying that Jesus is the light who came into a dark world. He conquered that darkness by being the one full revelation of the grace of God. And while the Bible sometimes talks about Jesus’ glory being veiled during his incarnation, John highlighted the fact that Jesus’ incarnation actually made his glory known in important ways. And far from obscuring Jesus’ glory, his incarnation as a human being actually revealed his glory. John wrote in John 1:14:

> We have seen his glory, the glory of the One and Only, who came from the Father, full of grace and truth (John 1:14).


### JESUS’ PUBLIC MINISTRY

Following the introduction, John recorded Jesus’ public ministry in John 1:19–12:50. In this section, John focused on the fact that Jesus came to his own people, the nation of Israel, and that the people of Israel rejected Jesus as their Christ and Lord. As we saw in John 1:11, John said that:

> [Jesus] came to that which was his own, but his own did not receive him (John 1:11).

Although there are important exceptions to this summary, this is generally how the nation of Israel responded to Jesus’ public ministry in the Gospel of John. 
	Our survey of Jesus’ public ministry will divide into seven parts, beginning with his preparation for ministry, and continuing with events surrounding six different Jewish feasts. Let’s look first at Jesus’ preparation for ministry in John 1:19–2:12.


#### Preparation for Ministry

The section on Jesus’ preparation for ministry begins with the ministry of John the Baptist in John 1:19-36. In this passage, John stressed that John the Baptist was an important witness to the fact that Jesus was the Son of God, and that Jesus would be God’s sacrificial lamb that would take away the sin of the world.
	Following this, John reported the calling of Jesus’ first disciples in John 1:37-51. As with the account of John the Baptist, the emphasis in this section is on Jesus’ identity. His disciples refer to him as “Rabbi,” which means teacher, in verse 38; “Messiah,” which means Christ, in verse 41; “the one Moses wrote about,” which was a reference to the prophet Moses had foretold, in verse 45; and “the Son of God” and its parallel term “the King of Israel,” in verse 49. Finally, in verse 51, Jesus identified himself as the “Son of Man” who had been sent to provide access to God’s presence. 
	The last part of Jesus’ preparation for ministry was his first miracle, which John recorded in John 2:1-12. This was the occasion when Jesus turned water into wine. But the focus wasn’t on the miracle itself. Listen to what John wrote in John 2:11:

> This, the first of his miraculous signs, Jesus performed at Cana in Galilee. He thus revealed his glory, and his disciples put their faith in him (John 2:11).

One of the main points John made was that this miracle was a sign that revealed Jesus’ glory, and that caused his disciples to trust him.

> The term “signs” is used in the book of Exodus in reference to the miracles that Moses performs, I guess specifically the plagues. And so signs are already, or the term “sign” is already used to refer to miracles, and I think that not only is John doing this because he often compares Jesus to Moses, which he does, but also, I think he actually has the same interest as the author of the book of Exodus in showing that the miracles were given to show people something, to give them, you could say, information that they were expected to act upon, and specifically that God is saying something to people, and people need to respond to that. 
> 
> —	Dr. David A. Redelings

John is unique among the Gospels in consistently calling Jesus’ miracles “semeion” — “signs” as it is usually translated. The miracles were not intended to draw attention to themselves, but to point beyond themselves to Jesus. Particularly they were intended to identify Jesus as both “the Christ” and “the Son of God,” in line with the purpose of the book that John summarized in John 20:30-31.

> Many people benefitted from Jesus’s miracles, but actually those who had eyes that had been opened were able to see that to which they pointed, namely the identity of Christ. And therefore, I think John uses a word that sort of speaks about the miracles, not just as being great miraculous events, but actually as pointing beyond themselves to the identity of Christ. And of course, John says that this is why he’s written, that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ and that by believing you might have life in his name and the signs perform that part of that function. 
> 
> —	Rev. Dr. Simon Vibert


> A sign is something that Jesus does that points to his true identity. And if you’d simply understand it on the material level of a wonderwork, then you’ve missed the point whether it is changing the water into wine, whether it’s feeding the crowd with bread miraculously, whether it’s healing the blind man. Throughout John, John sees that these are not just wonderworks, but these are things that if you see through them as God intends, you see the true revelation of Jesus’ identity; that he is the Bread of Life. That he’s the one who’s come to give us sight; that he brings the new wine of the coming age and we celebrate that. 
> 
> —	Dr. Robert L. Plummer

