#### First Passover

The second section dealing with Jesus’ public ministry is oriented around a Passover celebration in Jerusalem. We’ll refer to this as the first Passover because it’s the first one specifically named in John’s gospel. This section extends from John 2:13–4:54. 
	This section begins with John’s account of Jesus cleansing the temple by driving out the merchants in John 2:13-25. And once again, the focus was on Jesus’ identity. Listen to what the Jews asked Jesus in John 2:18:

> “What miraculous sign can you show us to prove your authority to do all this?” (John 2:18).

Jesus responded by foretelling his own death and resurrection, which would be the greatest sign in all his ministry that he was the Son of God. In his comments after this report, found in 2:21-25, John mentioned that Jesus also preformed many other signs, and that as a result many people believed in his name, at least superficially.
	Next, John reported Jesus’ amazing conversation with Nicodemus, a member of the Jewish ruling council, in 3:1-21. And again, the emphasis was on Jesus’ identity, this time as both the “Son of Man” and the “Son of God,” and on the saving role he had been sent to perform. 
	In John 3:22-36, we find another account of John the Baptist. In this one, John insisted that Jesus was the Christ, the Son of God. And he said that Jesus had come to testify about God and salvation, but that almost no one was receiving him in faith.
	In John 4:1-42, John reported Jesus’ encounter with a Samaritan woman at a well in Samaria. Once again, the emphasis was on Jesus’ identity as the Messiah, also called the Christ — the one who would come and explain all things to his people. By insisting that salvation would come through the Jews, and particularly through himself, Jesus challenged her way of thinking, and called her to find in him the life and reality of God that she had always wanted. And many Samaritans responded to this teaching by trusting in Jesus.
	Finally, in John 4:43-54, John reported Jesus’ second miraculous sign. Like the first sign, this one also took place in Cana. But this time Jesus healed a child without even touching or seeing him. And not surprisingly, the emphasis in this story is on the fact that the miracle was intended to validate Jesus’ authority, and that it led to faith in those who witnessed it.
	One important theme that runs throughout the section dealing with the first Passover is faith. John reported in 2:11 that after the first sign, the disciples believed in Jesus. In 4:42, the Samaritans believed because of Jesus’ teaching. And in 4:53, the family of the healed boy believed. Later, in John 7:50 and 19:39, we find reason to think that Nicodemus also became a believer in Jesus. Jesus’ signs and profound teaching were powerful testimonies to his identity and the salvation he offered, and many put their faith in him.

> Certainly, one of the main themes in the Gospel of John is saving faith; to believe is an emphasis throughout the gospel. And its emphasis is placing in two areas — one is that belief, or becoming a child of God, is a work of God himself, and the other is, is that it is an action, as it were, taken on the part of the individual saving faith is understood certainly as a gift, it’s God’s grace in our life that we believe — but it is based upon something that we are doing, and so there has to be an aspect of knowledge. There must be an understanding that Christ has died on the cross for our sins. There must also be a sense of assent, that we agree with that. But it goes far more than just knowing and agreeing. There is the sense of trust, and that is the crucial aspect of faith. It’s the empty hand of the individual reaching out and receiving all that God has done through his Son Christ. 
> 
> —	Dr. Jeff Lowman

> 
> You know, one of the most frustrating things about the world around us is that the word “faith” is used so casually and so carelessly. There are a lot of people who basically talk about faith as if they have faith in faith. That’s not the way Christians talk about faith. There are all kinds of different faith. I’m sitting in a chair right now. I’ve got pretty good confidence that it’s going to hold me up. I’ve got faith in this chair. However, I wouldn’t have any faith in this chair to do anything other than to hold me up. It serves no other purpose. When we talk about the faith that saves, it’s a faith in Christ. It is trusting and resting in that trust, that Christ has done all that is needful for our salvation. The faith that saves is a faith that is faith in Christ knowing that it’s Christ who paid the penalty for our sin, knowing that it is Christ who purchased our salvation, knowing that it is Christ who has made full atonement for our sins, knowing that in him we have full forgiveness of our sins. The faith that saves is simply the confidence to rest and trust in Christ, knowing that he has done this on our behalf, that there is no more that is left to be done, and that he keeps those who come to him by faith, forever. You know, saving faith, the faith that saves, is a faith that is defined by the fact that in its solitary, most essential meaning, we trust Christ. We would have nothing else. We desire nothing else. We know that Christ is sufficient for our salvation. 
> 
> —	Dr. R. Albert Mohler, Jr.

Sadly, not everyone responded to Jesus in faith. In 2:12-20, Jesus drove out those who had been polluting the temple. In 2:24-25, Jesus didn’t entrust or commit himself to many people, because he knew that they didn’t have true faith. And in 3:18-21, we read about the judgment that’s coming against those who refuse to believe. 


#### Unnamed Feast

The third portion of Jesus’ public ministry is associated with an unnamed feast, and is found in John 5:1-47. In verses 1-15, Jesus healed a man who had been an invalid for 38 years. But since it was the Sabbath day, Jesus was accosted by the Jews for violating the law against working on the Sabbath. John 5:16-47 records Jesus’ response, where he claimed to be the giver of eternal life to all who believe in him.


#### Second Passover

The fourth section detailing Jesus’ public ministry tells us of his observance of a second feast of Passover in John 6:1-71. The Passover was the feast where the Jews celebrated Israel’s exodus from Egypt. So, it’s not surprising that this section contains many references to the exodus. In 6:1-15, Jesus miraculously fed five thousand people with only five loaves of bread and two fish. This act recalled God’s provision of manna to the nation of Israel after they had been released from slavery in Egypt. 
	In John 6:16-24, Jesus walked on water, showing even greater command over the water than Moses had when he parted the Red Sea. Then, in 6:25-71, after crossing the sea, Jesus presented himself as “true bread from heaven,” which far surpasses the manna that God provided in the days of the Exodus. As the true bread, Jesus fulfilled the Passover Feast as the provider of true life for all believers.


#### Feast of Tabernacles

The fifth section of Jesus’ public ministry surrounds his observance of the feast of Tabernacles in John 7:1–10:21. In John 7:1-52, John recorded how Jesus observed and fulfilled the Feast of Tabernacles. The Feast of Tabernacles was a commemoration of God’s deliverance of Israel from Egypt, and of his provision of water in the wilderness. It also celebrated God’s continuing provision of rain for the harvest. And it looked forward to the day of God’s final deliverance of his people. During the feast, the priest illustrated God’s gracious provision by pouring out water around the altar of the temple. Using this imagery of water, Jesus boldly claimed that he was the one who could give them “living water.” 
	In John 8:12-59, Jesus addressed true sonship by calling himself the Son of God. Jesus called himself the Son of God. He even denied that unbelieving Jews were legitimate sons of Abraham. 
	In 9:1-41, Jesus healed a man who had been blind since birth. In response, suspicious Pharisees carefully investigate what Jesus has done. Their unbelief prompted Jesus to claim that the Pharisees were actually the ones who were blind, even though they claimed to see. And Jesus presented himself as the Good Shepherd in 10:1-21. In contrast to the Pharisees, Jesus was the Good Shepherd because he was willing to lay down his life for his sheep.


#### Feast of Dedication

The sixth section of Jesus’ public ministry records the events surrounding his observance of the Feast of Dedication in John 10:22–11:57. John 10:22-40 reports that Jesus observed and fulfilled the Feast of Dedication. This feast was not instituted in the Old Testament. Its observance began in 165 B.C., after the priestly family the Maccabees led a successful revolt against the Greek king Antiochus Epiphanes. Antiochus had taken the title Epiphanes because he believed himself to be a manifestation of god. He massacred many in Jerusalem, defiled the temple, and ordered the worship of Zeus by the Jews. So, the Feast of Dedication celebrated the purifying of the temple by re-consecrating it after it had been reclaimed by the Maccabees. Today, the feast is best known by its Hebrew name, Hanukkah, which means “dedication.” 
	This passage implicitly contrasts Jesus with Antiochus. On the one hand, Antiochus falsely claimed to be divine as he massacred God’s people and defiled his temple. On the other hand, Jesus really is God’s Son who faithfully does the Father’s work, including giving eternal life to his people. In John 10:36, Jesus even claimed that he had been set apart — or as some translations put it “consecrated” — and sent into the world. And this language recalled the consecration of the temple in the Feast of Dedication. And of course, Jesus had already compared the rebuilding of the temple to the resurrection of his body in John 2:19-21. 
	These themes are carried into the story of the resurrection of Lazarus in John 11:1 57, which demonstrates Jesus’ divine power over death. And the raising of Lazarus from the dead also foreshadows Jesus’ own resurrection at the end of the gospel, when all the hopes of the Feast of Dedication are finally fulfilled.


#### Third Passover

The seventh section dealing with Jesus’ public ministry is centered around preparations for a third Passover in John 12:1-50. Jesus’ preparations for this third Passover that John mentioned set the stage for his ministry to his twelve disciples in John 13–17, as well as for his sacrifice as the Passover lamb in chapter 19. Jesus’ preparations began with him being anointed for burial in 12:1 11. In verses 12-19, John recorded Jesus’ triumphal entry into Jerusalem. In John 12:20-50, Jesus announced publicly that it was the time for him to be glorified through his death and resurrection. Jesus called for those in his hearing to believe in him. But even after performing miracles before them, many Jews believed but many others did not. 
The next major portion of John’s gospel deals with Jesus’ private ministry to those who had received and believed in him. This section runs from in John 13:1–20:31.
