### JESUS’ PRIVATE MINISTRY

This section of the gospel contains John’s account of Jesus’ last supper with his disciples and his arrest, crucifixion, and resurrection. It is the story of how Jesus revealed his glory to his special people. John taught that Jesus intimately ministered to those who believed in him, and voluntarily gave his life for them. Through these events, Jesus displayed the glory of God in a way it had never been seen before. 
This section of John’s gospel unpacks the thought John had expressed in John 1:11 12, where he wrote these words:

> [Jesus] came to that which was his own, but his own did not receive him. Yet to all who received him, to those who believed in his name, he gave the right to become children of God (John 1:11-12).

In the first 12 chapters of John’s gospel, Jesus ministered to the world, but even his own did not receive him. Then, beginning in chapter 13, Jesus concentrated on those who did receive him: his disciples.
We will look at this section of John’s gospel in two parts. First, we will consider the events at the Last Supper. Second, we will look at the hour of Jesus’ greatest glory, namely, his death and resurrection. Let’s start with the events surrounding the Last Supper.


#### The Last Supper

Jesus’ ministry to his disciples at the Last Supper is described in four distinct parts. In the first part, Jesus served them by washing their feet in John 13:1-30.

Service. Jesus symbolized his whole earthly ministry as he humbly washed his disciples’ feet. This event dramatically portrayed both his incarnation and his saving sacrifice on the cross. The creator of the universe bowed before his own people and served them by washing their weary, dirty feet. It was a service that would reach its climax the next day on the cross when he would wash their weary, dirty souls with his cleansing blood. After washing their feet, Jesus announced that one of the disciples would betray him. Then, after Satan entered Judas, Judas left the room to accomplish the betrayal.
	After serving his disciples by washing their feet, Jesus comforted them in John 13:31–14:31.

Comfort. After Judas left, Jesus began what is often called his “farewell discourse,” in which he prepared his faithful disciples for the fact that he would soon be leaving them.

> Even though the apostles are the audience, to be sure, there is some reason why that needed to be preserved for future generations of apostolic ministry. In other words, there can be transferable concepts for any person who wants to live as an apostle and an apprentice, as one who is learning and one who understands that you’re sent into the world. If you have the vocational understanding of yourself, then there’s a lot of wonderful teachings in the upper room discourse. I do think there are particular applications for leaders in that passage. I think those chapters can be read with great profit by men and women who are called to places of leadership in the body of Christ. But what I normally say is that all Christian motif is really personified by Jesus in John 17, because he divides the prayer, you know, praying for the apostles, but then he says, “But I pray not only for them, but for those who will believe because of their testimony.” So, this whole section in John 14, 15, 16 and 17 is this back-and-forth between the Twelve and the ones who would serve in similar roles after the Twelve were gone. So, I see it as a section for all believers. 
> 
> —	Dr. Steve Harper

Jesus began his farewell discourse by saying that the time had come for him to be glorified — meaning that he was going to die, rise from the dead, and ascend to his Father in heaven. His disciples were going to have to live without his bodily presence walking, talking, and living among them. He also predicted that Peter was about to deny him three times. But Jesus knew that these difficult pieces of news troubled his disciples, so he comforted them, and reassured them that he would eventually bring them to the Father, too. And he told them that he wouldn’t leave them alone; he would send the Holy Spirit to minister to them in his place. Listen to Jesus’ promise in John 14:26:

> The Counselor, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, will teach you all things and will remind you of everything I have said to you (John 14:26).

Jesus promised that his disciples would never be alone. They would be put on trial and persecuted by the world, but they would never need to defend Jesus’ name and themselves alone. The Spirit of truth would empower them to speak and to write infallibly and authoritatively on Jesus’ behalf. 
	After comforting his disciples, Jesus prepared them for his departure and for their future ministries in John 15:1–16:33. 

Preparation. At the end of the previous section, Jesus and his disciples left the place where they had been, and Jesus began a new section of his discourse. He began by describing himself as “the true vine” in John 15:1-8. This metaphor appealed to Psalm 80:8 and Isaiah 5:1-7, where the nation of Israel was pictured as a glorious vine. Because of Israel’s failure and sin, she was later called a “corrupt, wild vine” in Jeremiah 2:21. But Jesus used this imagery to assure his disciples that he himself was reconstituting a true and faithful nation for Israel, and that they were part of this grand plan. Listen to what Jesus said in John 15:1-5:

> I am the true vine … I am the vine; you are the branches. If a man remains in me and I in him, he will bear much fruit (John 15:1-5).

By claiming to be the true vine, Jesus was saying that in an important sense, he himself was Israel. Jesus represented Israel, and he fulfilled Israel’s destiny. Israel had failed to establish God’s kingdom on earth, but Jesus was succeeding. And his disciples were the branches of the vine. They were a part of the people of God, and the agents through whom God would carry out his plan for the ages. 
	But Jesus also knew that the world would hate his disciples, because it already hated him. So, he assured them that he was opening the door of prayer to the Father for them. They were his ambassadors, his authoritative representatives on earth. And because of this, the Father would heed their prayers as if Jesus himself had prayed them. As he told them in John 16:23-24:

> I tell you the truth, my Father will give you whatever you ask in my name. Until now you have not asked for anything in my name. Ask and you will receive, and your joy will be complete (John 16:23-24).

After preparing his disciples, Jesus prayed for them in John 17:1-26. 

Prayer. Jesus’ prayer in John 17 is often called his High Priestly Prayer, because he interceded for his followers in priestly ways. In particular, Jesus prayed that the Father would protect his disciples so that many others might come to faith through them. He prayed that they and their own disciples would be protected from the forces of the world, that their unity would strengthen them, and that their lives would glorify God.

> Jesus knows that his time his short, that it’s time for him, as he says, to go back to be with the Father when they were one before the beginning of the world. And in this time, Jesus says that I’ve kept all that you have given me except one, the Son of Perdition, so that Scripture may be fulfilled. So, Jesus is really praying to the Father about the disciples. He says, I worked with them for 3 to 3-1/2 years to sanctify them, to bring them to this point. But now, I’m not going to be here with them, so Father, please keep them, continue this sanctification process because they’re going to be facing great trials and great persecutions, and now how are they going to get through this? So, again, it’s a prayer to God to take care of his disciples in preparation for the work and the trials, the persecutions, the martyrdom that is going to come before them, the things they’re going to have to sacrifice to spread the gospel message of Jesus Christ. 
> 
> —	Dr. Thaddeus J. James, Jr.

After describing the Last Supper, John reported Jesus’ death and resurrection in John 18:1–20:31.
