#### Death and Resurrection

In John’s gospel, Jesus’ death and resurrection, and their associated events, are often described as the hour of Jesus’ glory. In the Old Testament, the word “glory” often referred to the presence of God among his people. Throughout Israel’s history, God’s glory accompanied Israel. His glory was the cloud that led the Israelites during their wilderness wanderings in Exodus 16:10. It was in the tabernacle of God in Exodus 40:34-35. And God’s glory dwelt in Solomon’s temple in 1 Kings 8:11. And corresponding to this, in John’s gospel the word “glory” refers to Jesus as God incarnate that dwelled among his people. But when Jesus referred to “the hour of his glory,” he was usually referring to the particular point in his life in which his glory would be demonstrated to the world in the most profound way possible. In other words, he was referring to his death and resurrection.
	We don’t normally think of death as glorious. But Jesus’ death and resurrection purchased reconciliation for God’s people. His voluntary self-sacrifice and resurrection brought salvation and life to everyone that believed in him and received him as Messiah. They revealed God’s love and power to us in ways we never would have realized otherwise. They were tragic, but they were beautiful. And they brought God immeasurable honor and praise. In short, they were the most glorious events ever to take place in human history.


Arrest and Trials. First, we read of Jesus’ arrest in 18:1-11. After Judas betrayed Jesus into the hands of the authorities, soldiers and officials from the chief priest and Pharisees came and arrested Jesus. In 18:12-27, Jesus was brought to Caiaphas the high priest to be questioned. During this time, Peter denied Jesus three times, just as Jesus had prophesied. 
	Next, Jesus was tried by the Roman governor Pilate in 18:28–19:16. Pilate concluded that Jesus was innocent, but didn’t release him for fear of the Jews. But the true power behind Jesus’ arrest and trials was God himself. Neither Pilate nor Caiaphas was really in control. Everything happened according to God’s plan. As we read in John 19:10 11:

> Pilate said, “Don’t you realize I have power either to free you or to crucify you?” Jesus answered, “You would have no power over me if it were not given to you from above” (John 19:10-11).

The second major portion of John’s account of Jesus’ death and resurrection is the crucifixion in John 19:16-37. 

Crucifixion. In his account of Jesus’ death, John explained how the particular events of the crucifixion fulfilled several Old Testament expectations for the Messiah. These details demonstrated that Jesus wasn’t taken by surprise; everything took place according to God’s plan.
	Throughout his arrest, trials, and crucifixion, Jesus quietly maintained unbowed dignity. The Son of God laid down his life for his people, and in so doing revealed the glory of God in a way it had never been revealed before. How far would God go to deliver his people? All the way to the cross!

> The Bible says that Jesus went to the cross for the joy set before him. The cross was the hardest thing anybody’s ever done. There’s never been any greater suffering than what the Son of God experienced on the cross, as he not only died a brutally difficult physical death, but he endured the imposition of our sin on him, and the wrath of God on his shoulders. So, it was the hardest thing anybody’s ever done, but Jesus did it for the joy set before him. Now, why would he do that? He did it because he knew what it would result in. It would produce a display of God’s glory. A display of his love, his justice, his wrath, his holiness, his compassion, his mercy, all beautifully converging on the cross in a way where we see him for who he is, and we’re able to worship him for all of eternity as we gather around the Lamb who was slain. His throne is where we worship. So, God has displayed his character and his glory, and shown us who he is in the cross, and we worship him. And he brings many sons to glory in this cross. And so that’s why he was able to do it joyfully, because of what it ends up producing. 
> 
> —	Dr. K. Erik Thoennes

Third, the report of Jesus’ death and resurrection ends with the resurrection itself in John 20:1-31.

Resurrection. According to John 20:1-9, Jesus’ tomb was a historical fact. Mary, Peter and John himself saw that Jesus was not there. In 20:10-31, Jesus appeared to Mary Magdalene, the disciples, and to Thomas. These reports indicate that Jesus’ followers were somewhat skeptical and not easily fooled. 
	In particular, Thomas had not been present the first time Jesus appeared to the disciples. And Thomas was skeptical. He wanted evidence. He wasn’t going to believe some crazy story of a resurrection. And his confession in verse 28 is the climax of John’s narrative, where Thomas acknowledged Jesus with the words, “My Lord and my God.”

> It’s quite striking that when Thomas hears from the other disciples, who he’s knows personally, has been traveling with for all this time — he knows these guys — and they tell him they’ve seen Jesus risen, he just can’t bring himself to accept that. It’s not as though strangers are telling him this, and they all agree. And he just can’t bring himself to believe it. And, I think, I would suspect that it has to do with his inability to risk believing and being disappointed again. I think he’s afraid to be disappointed again. 
> 
> —	Dr. David A. Redelings


> You have the account of Thomas doubting and saying the famous words that, “Unless I put my fingers in the nail marks and in Jesus’ side, I will not believe,” and often Thomas is castigated as “Doubting Thomas” because he wouldn’t believe Jesus, but I think that we should be slightly less harsh on Thomas. In the first instance, John tells us that Thomas was not there with the Twelve when Jesus came among them and revealed himself to them. And secondly, if we believe that the disciples were selected to be eyewitnesses of Jesus’ resurrection, then there was a sense in which Thomas had to see in order to believe. And thirdly, we should also say that when Jesus did stand among them and he revealed himself to Thomas, Thomas makes the boldest and clearest profession of faith in the whole gospel. He calls Jesus “My Lord and my God.” And so, John then actually goes on to explain at the end of John 20, that Jesus said that, you know, because you’ve seen you believed, but from now on, blessed will be those who have not seen and yet believed. And there is a sense in which Thomas had to see in order to believe, but there is a sense in which you and I come to see, not through seeing Jesus before us, but actually coming to appreciate and understand all that they saw and coming to believe it for our self. So, I think we’re a bit unfair on Thomas sometimes because he did have a unique role, and because he is a great model of somebody who when he did see Jesus for who he is, he expressed wonderful faith in him. He actually is a model for us as well, that when we come to apprehend who Jesus is, we too should fall down and worship him as well. 
> 
> —	Rev. Dr. Simon Vibert

The last portion of John’s gospel is the conclusion to his account of Jesus’ earthly life and ministry, recorded in John 21:1-25.


#### CONCLUSION

This conclusion picks up themes from the whole gospel, and then directs readers toward the future. Like the preceding chapter, it reports a resurrection appearance of Jesus in verses 1-14. But the stress of the narrative is not on the fact of the appearance. In both verses 1 and 14, John spoke of this appearance as a revelation, using the same word he used in 2:11 when he said that Jesus “revealed his glory.” So, rather than using this appearance as a simple proof of the resurrection, John intended us to read this account as a completion of the revelation of Jesus and his glory that had begun in the first chapter of his gospel and continued throughout all its reports.
Moreover, the conclusion also confirms the authority of the apostles and other disciples to bear witness to Jesus, despite the fact that the preeminent apostle Peter had denied Jesus three times. In John 21:15-23, Jesus counteracted Peter’s denials by forgiving Peter, and by restoring him three separate times. And in these restorations, Jesus commissioned Peter to care for the flock of God. Jesus himself was the Good Shepherd. But now he appointed Peter to follow him in caring for the people of God.
	Each of the other gospels ends with some form of the Great Commission — Jesus command to his apostles and other disciples to build the church. And this story of Peter’s restoration is John’s way of looking to the future of the church. Jesus had promised to be with his people always. And he took this moment to make it clear that one way he would always be with his people was through other shepherds, like Peter. As Peter himself later wrote in 1 Peter 5:1-2:

> To the elders among you, I appeal as a fellow elder, a witness of Christ's sufferings and one who also will share in the glory to be revealed: Be shepherds of God's flock that is under your care (1 Peter 5:1-2).

Most scholars believe that John’s gospel was written as the last apostles were dying. John may even have been the very last apostle alive at this point. So, that made it important for God’s people to hear that Jesus was still present through the shepherds of his flock. Ultimately it wasn’t Peter or any other apostle who led the church. It was Jesus as they followed him. They served only as his ambassadors and helpers. And Jesus promised to return for his people himself, bodily and permanently, to lead them in the future.
	Now that we’ve looked at both the background and the structure and content of John’s gospel, we’re ready to consider some major themes that John emphasized.
