## MAJOR THEMES

John listed several important themes in his purpose statement in John 20:30-31, where we read these words:

> Jesus did many other miraculous signs in the presence of his disciples, which are not recorded in this book. But these are written that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that by believing you may have life in his name (John 20:30-31).

In this part of our lesson, we’ll focus on four closely related themes drawn from John’s purpose statement: the act of believing, Jesus’ identity as Christ, his parallel identity as the Son of God, and the blessing of life that he brings. Let’s begin with John’s emphasis on believing.


### BELIEVING

	John used the Greek word pisteuo, meaning “believe,” 106 times. The other three gospels all together used it 34 times, only about a third of John’s total. This difference in emphasis shows how important the idea of believing is to John’s story.
In John’s gospel, the concept of believing is closely related to other concepts signified by words like “receive,” “come to,” and “know.” So, to believe in Jesus is to receive him, to come to him, to know him in the sense of interpersonal experience.
	This kind of believing, receiving, knowing and coming to Jesus often begins as a moment of personal decision to trust and follow Christ — the same thing modern Christians often call “conversion.” When conversion is genuine, it causes us to participate in God’s work and to receive his blessings in a variety of ways. In this part of his gospel, John referred to conversion with terms like becoming children of God, and obtaining eternal life. Listen to John’s description of believing in John 1:12:

> To all who received him, to those who believed in his name, he gave the right to become children of God (John 1:12).

And we find similar language in John 3:36, where we read these words:

> Whoever believes in the Son has eternal life, but whoever rejects the Son will not see life (John 3:36).

In passages like these, believing is the sincere, heart-felt, act of personal reliance and commitment to Jesus that unites us with him. It makes us part of God’s work in history. And it will reach its fullness only when Jesus is revealed in all of his glory.
	Now, it’s important to realize that John didn’t always use the word “believe” in the same way. In some passages, John used the word “believe” to signify superficial faith — what theologians have often called “temporary” or “hypocritical” faith. 
For example, listen to John’s report in John 2:23-24:

While [Jesus] was in Jerusalem at the Passover Feast, many people saw the miraculous signs he was doing and believed in his name. But Jesus would not entrust himself to them, for he knew all men (John 2:23-24).

Jesus didn’t entrust himself to these people because their belief was only superficial. It wasn’t the sincere belief that theologians often call “saving faith.” 
	For the most part, we can tell from the contexts where John spoke of “believing” that he usually had in mind true saving faith — true trust in Jesus as Savior and Lord. For John, Jesus — the object of our belief — makes all the difference. It’s not the power of our belief that saves us, but the power of the one in whom we believe. 
Now that we’ve looked at the theme of believing in Jesus, let’s turn to one of the main things John would have us believe about Jesus, namely, that he’s the Christ, the Messiah, the fulfillment of God’s ancient promises to his people Israel.


### CHRIST

By calling Jesus “Christ,” John clearly identified him as Israel’s king. After all, in the first century the term “Christ” or “Messiah” had become the functional equivalent of “king of Israel.” This is who the Christ was. But the fact that Jesus was Israel’s king had many implications, and John drew attention to several of these. 
	For instance, John stressed that like the kings of Israel and Judah in the Old Testament, Jesus embodied the people that he ruled. Jesus became everything that Israel had failed to be, and he thereby received all the blessings that Israel had previously failed to gain. As Israel’s king, Jesus represented Israel in every capacity, and served both as their substitute and as the conduit of God’s blessings to them.
> 	In John 15:1-8, John demonstrated this truth about Jesus by reporting that Jesus was the true vine, and that his followers were branches in him. Listen to what Jesus said in John 15:5-8:

I am the vine; you are the branches. If a man remains in me and I in him, he will bear much fruit … This is to my Father's glory, that you bear much fruit, showing yourselves to be my disciples (John 15:5-8).

Throughout the Old Testament, Israel had been pictured as the vine of God. We find this imagery in places like Psalm 80, Jeremiah 2, Ezekiel 17, and Hosea 10. Moreover, the royal family of David, and even the future great Messiah, were represented as the branch out of which the entire people of God would grow. We see this in places like Isaiah 11:1. So, against this background, when Jesus claimed to be the true vine and the only route to pleasing and glorifying God, his disciples would have understood that Jesus was the true King of Israel who represented and embodied his people. 
	But what are the implications of this idea that as king, Jesus is the true or real Israel? For one thing, it means that Jesus was fulfilling everything that Israel was called to be. Israel had failed to be and to do what God had called her to be and do. But where Israel failed because of sin, Jesus perfectly succeeded. He fulfilled Israel’s destiny. In his own person, Jesus summed up centuries of Old Testament history and revealed the reality of God’s glorious presence as only he could reveal it. And because of this, the true people of Israel aren’t identified by membership in the nation of Israel. Instead, they’re the people who are branches in the true vine — believers in Christ, who are united to him by faith.
	Our discussion of Jesus’ representative role as the Christ will focus on three ways Jesus fulfilled the Old Testament expectations for the Messiah that were particularly important in John’s gospel. First, Jesus fulfilled the temple. Second, he fulfilled the expectations created by Israel’s feasts. And third, he fulfilled God’s law. We’ll look at each of these ideas, beginning the way that Jesus fulfilled the temple.
