#### Temple

One of the reasons the temple was important in Scripture is that it was a place where God had promised to be present with his people in a special way. Of course, we know that God is omnipresent; he is everywhere all the time. But when we talk about his special presence, we have in mind manifestations of his presence — times when God concentrated his presence in particular locations, often in a way that was visibly glorious.

> God’s presence in the tabernacle and the temple is significant because the tabernacle and the temple are the universe in miniature. They are microcosms of what the world is, and so God’s presence there really represents his presence in the world. The world is the temple that he made in which he would commune with his people. And then, when Adam rebelled, God chose this one line of people that eventually becomes the nation of Israel, and he takes up residence among them, and where he dwells among them is in this miniature replica of what the universe was, and his presence there is unique because that’s where Israel goes to be in the presence of God, to the tabernacle, and later to the temple, and it’s also something of a foretaste of what God is going to do in the whole world. When God fills the tabernacle at its consecration, when it’s completed at the end of Exodus, and later when he fills the temple when it’s completed in 1 Kings 8, we’re really getting a preview of what’s going to happen in the universe when the glory of God is fully known. 
> 
> —	Dr. James M. Hamilton 

The theme of God’s special presence among his people is fulfilled in a number of stages in biblical history. In the beginning, the Garden of Eden was the sanctified place on earth where God’s central special presence could be found. It was to serve as his throne room on earth, from which humanity was to sanctify the entire earth, turning the whole world into God’s holy kingdom. 
	Later, when God established Israel as his royal priesthood, he associated his special presence first with the tabernacle and later with the temple. The decorations and furnishings of the tabernacle and temple were modeled after the Garden of Eden, and both the tabernacle and the temple served the same function as the garden. Scripture confirms this connection by pointing out that the tabernacle and temple were God’s royal throne room on earth — places where he dwelled gloriously in the midst of his people. This fact is made clear in places like 1 Chronicles 28:2, Psalm 11:4, and Isaiah 6:1. These were the most sacred areas on earth. They were places where God’s blessings could be readily obtained by his people. And like the Garden of Eden, they were the center of his kingdom, from which his people were to sanctify the earth as his kingdom. And according to John’s gospel, a vital way to understand the importance of Jesus is to see that he fulfills the Old Testament theme of God’s tabernacle and temple. Listen to what John wrote in John 1:14:

> [Jesus] became flesh and made his dwelling among us. We have seen his glory, the glory of the One and Only, who came from the Father, full of grace and truth (John 1:14).

When John spoke of Jesus “dwelling among us,” he used the Greek verb skenoō, which is related to the noun skēnē, meaning tent or tabernacle. In fact, this same noun is used for God’s sacred tabernacle in the Septuagint — the Greek translation of the Old Testament. By using this verb and associating it with the “glory” of God’s presence, John made it clear that Jesus was now providing the same access to God’s special presence that had previously be available at the tabernacle. 
And John made the same point about the temple in John 2:19-21, where we read this account:

> Jesus answered them, “Destroy this temple, and I will raise it again in three days.” The Jews replied, “It has taken forty-six years to build this temple, and you are going to raise it in three days?” But the temple he had spoken of was his body (John 2:19-21).

Here, John made it clear that Jesus was the fulfillment of the temple, too.
	John also made it clear that even after Jesus was no longer physically present on the earth, his followers would enjoy the special presence of God. This is why, in John 4:21, Jesus told the Samaritan woman that a day was quickly coming when neither the Jerusalem temple nor the Samaritan holy place would have special priority in the worship of God. As Jesus said in John 4:23-24:

A time is coming and has now come when the true worshippers will worship the Father in spirit and truth … God is spirit, and his worshipers must worship in spirit and in truth (John 4:23-24).

Jesus’ words to the Samaritan woman should be a great encouragement to the modern church, because we live in the very time Jesus was talking about. In our day, Jesus isn’t physically present on earth. According to Hebrews 8:2, and 9:11-12, he physically resides in God’s tabernacle in heaven. But he’s present with us spiritually, especially when we gather as his church. We see this in places like Matthew 18:20, and 1 Peter 2:4-9. And because Jesus is present with us, we are now the sacred temple of God’s special presence on earth.
	But even this wonderful fulfillment of the temple in Christ will be surpassed when Jesus returns in glory. Passages like Revelation 21:1-5 teach that when Christ comes back, he’ll transform the entire creation into God’s dwelling place. At that time, Christ and the Father will always be present with us, and the entire earth will be filled with the glory of God. 
	A second way that Jesus met Old Testament messianic expectations in John’s gospel was by fulfilling the significance of Israel’s feasts.


#### Feasts

As we mentioned earlier, much of John’s gospel can be outlined around several feasts that Jesus attended. Among these feasts were various celebrations of Passover, Tabernacles and Dedication. God established these feasts to identify Israel as a royal priesthood, and to give them regular ways to enjoy the blessings of his special presence in the tabernacle and temple. And in his gospel, John made it clear that Jesus fulfilled the significance of these feasts. 
	The Passover feast was one of Israel’s three main annual feasts. It celebrated Israel’s exodus from Egypt. In brief, Jesus fulfilled this feast because he was like the Passover lamb, which was slain and eaten on Passover, and whose blood was symbolic of Israel’s deliverance from Egypt. All four gospel writers identified Jesus as the true Passover Lamb. But only John highlighted this fact by reporting the words of John the Baptist who said, “Look, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world!” in John 1:29. In John 19:33, John also reported that when Jesus died, the soldiers “did not break his legs,” fulfilling the requirement in Exodus 12:46 that the bones of lambs chosen for the Passover feast shouldn’t be broken. In these and many other ways, John showed that Jesus fulfilled the symbolism and meaning of Passover.
	In John 7:2, 37, John also reported Jesus’ celebration of another of Israel’s three annual feasts: the Feast of Tabernacles. One of the most important rituals of this feast involved pouring water in recollection of the way God provided water for Israel in the wilderness, and the way God provided rain for Israel’s crops year after year; and in anticipation of the way God would pour out streams of blessings on his people in the last days. And John drew a strong connection between this ceremony and Jesus by pointing out that Jesus is the conduit of all the blessings God will pour out at the climax of history. Specifically, John reported that on the last day of the Feast of Tabernacles, Jesus announced his power to dispense God’s blessings. Listen to what Jesus told the crowds in John 7:37:
 
> If anyone is thirsty, let him come to me and drink (John 7:37).

John reported that the streams of living water of God’s blessing flow from Jesus. Past blessing, present blessing, and future blessing all come through him. In this way, Jesus is the fulfillment of all the hopes for God’s blessings that were pictured in the Feast of Tabernacles.
	Finally, in John 10:22-39, Jesus celebrated the Feast of Dedication or Hanukkah. The Feast of Dedication wasn’t one of Israel’s major feasts established in the Old Testament. But it was significant to Israel’s life in the first century because it celebrated Israel’s victory over its Greek oppressors in 165 B.C., as well as the rededication of the altar and the temple that took place after this victory. In John 10:30, while Jesus was celebrating the Feast of Dedication, he made the startling claim. 

> I and the Father are one (John 10:30).

The Jews understood that he was claiming to be God, and responded by trying to stone him. Then Jesus defended himself in John 10:36 by referring to himself as:

> The one whom the Father set apart (John 10:36).

When Jesus said that he was “set apart,” he used the common Greek term hagiazō, which the Scriptures use many times to refer to dedication and consecration in the ceremonies of the Temple. In this context, hagiazō is nearly synonymous with the Greek term egkainia — the word translated “dedication” in the expression “Feast of Dedication.”
	In these ways, John closely associated Jesus with the celebration of the dedication or consecration of the temple. The feast celebrated the temple being set apart for the presence of God. And in a similar way, Jesus was set apart as the fulfillment of God’s special presence on the earth. 
In addition to showing that Jesus fulfilled the expectations for the temple and the feasts, John also demonstrated that Jesus fulfilled God’s law.


#### The Law

Although Christians are often accustomed to thinking of God’s law in negative terms — as something that condemns us — we also need to remember that the law was given to true believers as a guide toward God’s blessings.

> When you look at the law in the Bible, it’s clear that the people who read it didn’t simply believe that they were reading a list of rules and regulations. It was a life orientation. And so, they could read it knowing that, if they kept the law, they would be blessed in the keeping of it, and I think there are several reasons for that. One is that the law is God’s revelation. The law tells us how God wants us to live. And the psalmist in 40:8 says, “I delight to do Thy will, O God.” So, when we align ourselves with the will of God, when we understand what the will of God is, then we find great joy and blessing in doing whatever it is that we are supposed to do, or not doing what we’re told to not to do. So, the mere fact that it is revelation is a sign of God’s blessing, a sign of God’s favor. But more than that, I think it’s a blessing because it’s actually, the law is actually an invitation for us to participate in what God wants to bring about on the earth. 
> 
> —	Dr. Steve Harper


> The predominant use of law in the Old Testament is positive because God’s law is a reflection of God’s character. And so, the Psalms, for instance, speak of God’s law as a light to our path and a lamp to our feet. David in the Psalms described it as sweeter than the honeycomb, more precious than gold, in keeping them his servant is warned, and there is great reward in them. In fact, the whole Psalms begin that way — “Blessed is the man who doesn’t walk in the counsel of the wicked nor stand in the way of sinners or sit in the seat of scoffers, but his delight is in the law of the Lord” — then Psalm 1 goes on to paint an image that the one who fears God and keeps his commands is like a tree planted by a stream that never ceases to bear fruit. And so, the law is a place of blessedness. But it’s only a place of blessedness for those for whom God has first granted forgiveness, that forgiveness which comes through Christ. But the law then is a guide to how to live life under Christ as a life of blessing. And so, the one who loves Christ fulfills the law, Paul says, that Christ is the goal or the purpose of the law. So, the law teaches us our sin, but it also shows us what Jesus has done for us and then ultimately provides us a guide for living. So that the whole law, Jesus said, is summed up in two commands: love God, heart, soul, mind, strength, and love neighbor as self. So, anyone who has known someone who loves God heart, soul, mind and strength, knows the blessing of that kind of a person. And anyone who has known somebody who loves neighbor as that person loves himself, they know there’s great blessing in that. There’s generosity, there’s mercy, there’s provision, there’s blessedness in being around and even in the presence of those who are faithful to God’s commands. 
> 
> —	Rev. Michael J. Glodo

In the Old Testament, God’s Law was portrayed as a special gift to his people. Psalm 119 and many other passages celebrate it as Israel’s guide to the blessings of God. And in the New Testament, James called the law of God the perfect law that gives freedom in James 1:25, and Paul called it Christ’s law in 1 Corinthians 9:21. And Jesus himself affirmed the Law’s importance and value in John 10:35 when he said:

> The Scripture cannot be broken (John 10:35).

Here, Jesus taught that the entire Old Testament, including the law, is God’s perpetual and abiding word to his people.
	Even so, John made it clear that the law wasn’t an end in itself. In an important sense, it always pointed beyond itself to Jesus. In John 5:46-47 Jesus told the unbelieving Jews:

> If you believed Moses, you would believe me, for he wrote about me. But since you do not believe what he wrote, how are you going to believe what I say? (John 5:46-47).

John emphasized this point throughout his gospel. The Old Testament law pointed forward to Jesus. So, to reject Jesus was also to reject the law that foretold him.
	One way John stressed this was by applying to Jesus the titles, characteristics, and actions that Judaism had already given to the law. For example, Judaism had said you should feed a hungry enemy with “the bread of the Torah.” And in John 6:35, Jesus is called “the bread of life.” Judaism had claimed that the “words of the Torah are life for the world.” And in John 4:11, Jesus is the giver of living water. Judaism also spoke of “the light of the Law which was given to lighten every man.” And John 1:9 calls Jesus “the true light that gives light to every man.” These are just a few of many examples in John’s gospel that show that Jesus embodied God’s law. Jesus and his teachings continue to be the source of life and light for all who follow him.
John dearly wanted his readers to understand what it meant for Jesus to be the Christ. He wanted them to take comfort in the knowledge that Jesus hasn’t abandoned his church, but is always present with us. He wanted them to trust in Jesus, so that they would receive God’s blessings through him. And he wanted them to be obedient to the Word of God, so that they would glorify the Lord as his kingdom of priests.
Now that we’ve looked at the major themes of believing in Jesus, and Jesus’ identity as the Christ, we should consider his closely related identity as the Son of God.

