### SON OF GOD

Jesus’ identity as the Son of God is parallel to his identity as the Christ because they both refer to the fact that he is the king over God’s kingdom on earth. But it’s worth discussing these terms separately because they each have different nuances. 
	In John’s gospel the term Son of God refers to the divine messianic King. On the one hand, it refers to the concept of the Divine Son who came down from heaven to earth, as in John 10:22-40. On the other hand, it can be synonymous with King of Israel or Christ, the human descendant of David who was the rightful king over Israel, as we see in John 1:49 and 11:27.
To get a better understanding of what it means for Jesus to be the Son of God in the Gospel of John, it helps to see how John stressed the great mystery that Jesus is both fully divine and fully human. Let’s look first at the idea that Jesus is fully divine.


#### Divine

One way that John portrayed the divinity of the Son was through the relationship between Jesus the Son and God the Father. There are many passages that demonstrate that this relationship is qualitatively different from the relationships the Father has with his merely human children, such as believers. Listen to this exchange between Jesus and the Jews in John 10:30-33:

> [Jesus said,] “I and the Father are one.” Again the Jews picked up stones to stone him, but Jesus said to them, “I have shown you many great miracles from the Father. For which of these do you stone me?” “We are not stoning you for any of these,” replied the Jews, “but for blasphemy, because you, a mere man, claim to be God” (John 10:30-33).

The Jews rightly understood that Jesus’ claim of unity in his relationship with God the Father was, in fact, a claim that Jesus actually was God. 
Moreover, according to John 14:9, Jesus is the unique Son of God who revealed the Father as no one else could ever do. Although 1:18 does not use the word “son” the thought is exactly the same. Jesus perfectly reveals his Father to his people. In fact, according to Jesus, in John 14:9, to see Jesus is to see the Father. 
And beyond these matters of revelation, Jesus also possesses full divine authority over things like life and death, and ultimate judgment. As we read in John 5:21-22:

> Just as the Father raises the dead and gives them life, even so the Son gives life to whom he is pleased to give it. Moreover, the Father judges no one, but has entrusted all judgment to the Son (John 5:21-22).

John made it clear that Jesus was God in the flesh. He was God himself, with unlimited authority to carry out God’s work on the earth.
	Another way John portrayed the divinity or deity of the Son was through Jesus’ description of himself as the “I Am.” In Exodus 3:14, God revealed his covenant name to Moses by saying, “I am who I am.” This was the basis of the divine name that has often been represented in English simply as “the Lord.” God’s name was thought to be so holy that the Jews of Jesus’ day refused to pronounce it. But Jesus applied it to himself.

> In John’s gospel, he’s got “I am” statements that show up about 24 times in things Jesus says. He’s got more than any of the other gospels and about half in the whole New Testament. The significance in the first place is that it’s a way of identifying Jesus with the God of the Old Testament. So, seven of these statements is just kind of a bare “I am,” and on least one of those occasions in John 8:58, 59 when he says it, they pick up rocks to try to execute him for claiming to be the God of the Old Testament. The rest of the statements are “I am” connected with something, like “I am the Bread”; “I am the Light”; “I am the Way the Truth and the Life.” These are where you have Jesus claiming to be God, but God related to human life. So, I think that we should read all of the statements together, that John is putting forward for us something Jesus has done, to say, “This man existed in prior time because he is God.” When he makes the claim, “Before Abraham was, I am” in John 8:58, it’s not just claiming to have lived two thousand years before; it’s claiming to be the God who interacted with Abraham and the God who is eternal. 
> 
> —	Dr. John E. McKinley

In John 8:12-59 Jesus and the Jewish leaders were engaged in an explosive confrontation. The controversy had to do with Jesus’ claim to sonship, and his opponents’ claim to be sons of Abraham. In verse 44, Jesus told them that their true father was the devil. In return they challenged him by asking if he was greater than Abraham. Then Jesus ended the argument with these words in John 8:58:

> Before Abraham was born, I am! (John 8:58).

Jesus didn’t say, “I was,” as would have been natural if he simply meant that he was older than Abraham. He said, “I am” claiming to be not only older and greater than Abraham, but to be the eternal God of Israel himself.
Having considered Jesus’ divinity, let’s look at John’s treatment of the fact that as the Son of God, Jesus was also fully human.


#### Human

Since the time of David, the term “Son of God” was used to refer to the human king who sat on David’s throne as king over Israel. We can see this in places like Psalm 2:7 and 2 Samuel 7:14. John 7:42 also shows that the Jews expected the Christ to come from David’s family. And in John 1:49, the term “Son of God” is used as a synonym for “King of Israel.” 
Several other passages in John’s gospel also identify Jesus as the King of the Jews, such as 12:13-15, 18:33-40, and 19:1-21. In short, when John identified Jesus as the Son of God, part of what he meant was that Jesus was David’s perfect human descendant that would rule over Israel forever.
	The Gospel of John stresses that as the Son of God, Jesus possesses both full divine kingship and full human kingship. Every hope that the Old Testament put in God’s reign over the universe, and every hope that the Old Testament established for the rule of the Davidic Messiah, is fulfilled in the kingship of Jesus
So far, we’ve looked at the major themes of believing in Jesus, and Jesus’ identity as the Christ and the Son of God. So, now we’re ready to turn to the blessing of life that comes to those who believe in Christ.

