### LIFE

John used the word “life” 36 times in his gospel. The other three gospel writers used it a total of 16 times. But it isn’t just the sheer number of times that he used it that gives “life” its great importance in this gospel. It’s also the role “life” plays in the gospel message. In John 17:3, Jesus defined “life” in this way:

> Now this is eternal life: that they may know you, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom you have sent (John 17:3).

Of course, this knowledge is far more than mere intellectual awareness of God. It includes a measure of rational cognition about God. But more importantly, it’s a relationship with him — a personal experience of his presence and involvement in our lives. This fellowship with our Creator is one of the main goals of human existence.

According to John 3:16, this life can also be called “eternal,” meaning that it will never end. But John makes it clear that we don’t have to die in order to obtain this eternal life. In fact, believers already possess eternal life. As Jesus said in John 5:24:

> Whoever hears my word and believes him who sent me has eternal life and will not be condemned; he has crossed over from death to life (John 5:24).

Life is already the gift of God to those who believe in Jesus. 

> You know, the words that come together as eternal life come to us so easily because we encounter them so often in Scripture. We know that one of the gifts of our salvation through Christ is eternal life. But you know, we are chronological creatures. That’s just the way we think. We think in terms of seconds and minutes and hours and days and months and years, and so it’s easy for us to think that eternal life is the life we know now, just with a longer calendar, a calendar that never ends. That’s not actually the biblical notion of eternal life. The first meaning of eternal life in Scripture is that it is life in God. It is God who is eternal. One of the contrasts between God and we who are his human creatures is that we are very temporal. We feel time. But God is timeless. And by the atonement that Christ has achieved for us, those who are in Christ enter into the eternal life of God. And so, eternal life means we are alive in Christ with God forever. It’s not just a calendar that never runs out of pages. It’s a state of existence, which is grounded in God himself, and in the fact that he is eternal. But you know, the second word there in that couplet is really important, the word “life,” because in the Scripture there’s a contrast between life and death. And after the judgment, there’s a contrast between eternal life and the second death. So, eternal life also is an affirmation that in Christ, those whose sins are forgiven, we know life with God and Christ forever. We are forever in the presence of God. We enter into a state of existence which is timeless, eternal, that is all about the glory of God and the comfort and joy and exhilaration of being in God’s presence and praising him forever. The contrast of that is hell, defined as a second death. So, what we’re talking about here with eternal life is not just length in eternity. It’s the richness of being with Christ and having fellowship with God, rather than spending eternity in hell. 
> 
> —	Dr. R. Albert Mohler, Jr.

Eternal life is a gift of deliverance from divine judgment into never-ending joy and peace. And it can only be obtained from God by believing in his Son Jesus. And John’s gospel stresses at least two reasons for this. First, Jesus is the creator and the source of life, as we learn in places like John 1:1-5, 5:26, 11:25, and 14:6. And therefore, Jesus has the right to dispense life to those he wishes. In fact, Jesus made this point explicitly in John 5:21.
The second reason that eternal life can only be obtained through Jesus is that only Jesus possesses the words of life, that is, the gospel message that leads people into a saving knowledge of God. Jesus explained this in places like John 6:63, and 12:49-50. And Peter confirmed it in John 6:68.
Jesus is “the One and Only”; or as he is called in John 1:18, “God the One and Only.” No one else has ever revealed the heavenly Father like Jesus has, because no one else has ever come from the Father like Jesus has. Jesus’ unique role as the revealer of God is grounded in his identity as “God the One and Only,” who came to show us the Father and give us eternal life.
And so, throughout John’s gospel, Jesus is the giver of life to all who believe. Those who don’t believe don’t understand his words, and they reject the life he offers. But those who do believe receive eternal life right now, and immeasurable blessings in the age to come.
