## CONCLUSION

In this lesson, we’ve explored the background of the Gospel According to John in terms of its author and occasion of writing; we’ve surveyed its structure and content; and we’ve considered the major themes of believing, Jesus’ identity as Christ and Son of God, and the blessing of life in his name. 
John’s gospel shows us that Jesus is the fulfillment of all of God’s promises of blessing. Jesus is the Christ. He can and will keep every glorious promise God has made because Jesus is the saving Son of God. And those promises and that salvation include the wonderful gift of eternal life. If we hold fast to these hopes as we read John’s gospel, we’ll be better prepared to understand it and to apply to it our lives. And if we keep them in our hearts as we live, we’ll be better prepared to glorify God, and to enjoy the eternal life he has given us through his Son Jesus.
 
## CONTRIBUTORS

Dr. Pete Alwinson (Host) is the Executive Director of FORGE: City Wide Ministry to Men with Man in the Mirror. He is also the founding pastor of Willow Creek Presbyterian Church (PCA) in Winter Springs, FL, where he served as Senior Pastor for 26 years. Dr. Alwinson received his M.Div. from Trinity Evangelical Divinity School and his D.Min. from Reformed Theological Seminary. He is an Adjunct Professor at Reformed Theological Seminary, a Board Member of Key Life Network, and the author of Like Father, Like Son: How Knowing God as Father Changes Men. 


Rev. Larry Cockrell is Senior Pastor of Household of Faith Church and faculty member of Birmingham Theological Seminary.

Dr. James M. Hamilton is Associate Professor of Biblical Theology at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary and Preaching Pastor of Kenwood Baptist Church.

Dr. Steve Harper is the founding Vice President of the Florida Dunnam campus of Asbury Theological Seminary in Orlando, FL, and retired Professor of Spiritual Formation and Wesley Studies..

Dr. Thaddeus J. James, Jr. is Vice President of Academic Affairs at Birmingham Theological Seminary.

Dr. Jeff Lowman is Senior Pastor at Evangel Church PCA in Alabaster, Alabama and Professor of Homiletics and Systematic Theology at Birmingham Theological Seminary.

Dr. John E. McKinley is Associate Professor of Biblical and Theological Studies at Talbot School of Theology.

Dr. R. Albert Mohler, Jr. is President of The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.

Dr. Robert L. Plummer is Collin and Evelyn Aikman Professor of Biblical Studies at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary and the Founder and Host of The Daily Dose of Greek screencast.

Dr. David A. Redelings is Professor of New Testament at Bethel Seminary.

Dr. Mark L. Strauss is Professor of New Testament at Bethel Seminary, San Diego.

Dr. K. Erik Thoennes is Professor of Biblical and Theological Studies at Biola University’s Talbot School of Theology and is Chair of the Biblical and Theological Studies Theology Department.

Rev. Dr. Simon Vibert is Vicar of Christ Church Virginia Water in Surrey, England, and the former Vice Principal and Director of the School of Preaching at Wycliffe Hall, Oxford.
 
## GLOSSARY
 
 
A.D. 70 – Year of the destruction of Jerusalem and the temple 

Antiochus IV – Greek ruler from 175-164 B.C. who massacred Jews, defiled the temple, and ordered Jews to worship Zeus; often called "Epiphanes" because he thought he was "god manifest"

Caiaphas – High priest in Jerusalem during Jesus’ public ministry; a Sadducee and member of the Sanhedrin who had a leading role in the trial that led to Jesus’ crucifixion

Capernaum – City on the northern coast of the Sea of Galilee where Jesus often preached and performed miracles early in his ministry

Christ – From the Greek word "christos" meaning "the anointed" or "anointed one"; closely tied to the Old Testament Hebrew term "messiah" 

christos – Greek word (transliteration) for Christ; used in the Septuagint to translate "mashiach" or "messiah," meaning "anointed one"

Clement of Alexandria – (ca. A.D. 150-215) Early church father and writer from Alexandria

Codex Sinaiticus – A Greek manuscript of the Bible handwritten in the middle of the 4th century that was discovered in a convent at the foot of Mount Sinai

Codex Vaticanus – A 4th-century Greek manuscript of the Bible housed in the Vatican library; believed to be the oldest extant copy of the Greek Bible; written by scribes on sheets of parchment in a three-column format

crucifixion – a form of the death penalty used in the ancient Roman Empire in which criminals were tied or nailed to a cross and then hung there until they died, typically by suffocation; the means by which Jesus died

egkainia – Greek word (transliteration) meaning “dedication” or “renewal”, as in the Feast of Dedication 

Ephesus – City in Asia Minor; visited by Paul on his third missionary journey; place where John probably wrote the fourth gospel; said to have lost their "first love" in Revelation 

euangelion – Greek word (transliteration) for "gospel"; literally "good news"

euangelion kata Iōannēn – Greek phrase (transliteration) meaning "the gospel according to John"  

Eusebius – (A.D. 263-340) Early Christian historian who wrote Ecclesiastical History

Feast of Dedication  – Eight-day Jewish festival celebrating the Maccabees’ successful revolt against Antiochus IV and the subsequent purification of the temple in 165 B.C.; today called “Hanukkah” or the “Festival of Lights”

Feast of Tabernacles – Week-long Jewish festival commanded by God in Leviticus 23 that celebrates God’s deliverance of Israel from Egypt; also called the “Feast of Booths” or “Sukkot”

hagiazō – Greek word (transliteration) meaning “to make holy,” “consecrate,” “sanctify” 
Hanukkah – Also called “Feast of Dedication” or “Festival of Lights”; Eight-day Jewish festival celebrating the Maccabees’ successful revolt against Antiochus IV and the subsequent purification of the temple in 165 B.C.

Irenaeus – (ca. A.D. 130-202) Second-century bishop and early Christian writer who wrote Against Heresies in which he refuted Gnosticism and affirmed the validity of the four gospels 

John – Son of Zebedee and brother of James; one of the twelve Apostles; author of the Gospel of John; 1, 2, 3 John; and the book of Revelation; sometimes called "the disciple Jesus loved"

John the Baptist – New Testament prophet who called for true repentance and proclaimed that the arrival of God's kingdom was near; identified Jesus as the Messiah and prepared the way for Jesus’ public ministry

Maccabees – Jewish family of priests, led by Mattathias, who organized a successful revolt against Antiochus IV and the Greeks starting around 168 B.C. 

manna – A type of food that God provided for Israel in the desert during the exodus from Egypt; also called “bread from heaven” 

Mark – Also known as John Mark; author of the Gospel of Mark and cousin of Barnabas; accompanied Paul and Barnabas on their first missionary journey

Martyr, Justin – (ca. A.D. 100-165) Early Christian apologist who converted to Christianity as an adult and was martyred for his beliefs

mashiach – Hebrew word (transliteration) for "messiah"; anointed one

Messiah – Hebrew word meaning "anointed one"; the great King from David’s royal line who would bring about the transition from this age to the age to come; translated "Christos" in Greek 

Moses – Old Testament prophet and deliverer who led the Israelites out of Egypt; man with whom God made a national "covenant of law" and who administered the Ten Commandments and the Book of the Covenant to the Israelites; also appeared with Elijah at Jesus' transfiguration

Nicodemus – A Pharisee and member of the Jewish ruling council who asked Jesus how a man could be born again (John 3:4)

Passover – Jewish festival remembering when God delivered Israel out of slavery in Egypt 

Peter – One of Jesus' twelve apostles; also called Simon; a leader in the early Christian church; preached on the Day of Pentecost in Acts 2; according to church historians, Mark relied on Peter's accounts of Christ's life to write his gospel

Pharisees – Jewish religious sect from the first century known for their strict observance of the Law; believed in the future resurrection, but also believed that God would not intervene until Israel became obedient to the Law

Pilate – Roman prefect under Tiberius Caesar from A.D. 26 to 36 who authorized Jesus’ crucifixion; also known as Pontius Pilate

pisteuo – Greek word (transliteration) meaning "believe"

Polycarp – (ca. A.D. 69 – 156) Church father and bishop of Smyrna who was a disciple of the apostle John and was martyred for his Christian faith

Polycrates – Bishop of Ephesus in the end of the 2nd century  

Qumran – Archaeological site near the Dead Sea where the Dead Sea Scrolls were found in caves during the last half of the 20th century

rabbi – Jewish name for "teacher"

Rylands Papyrus / Papyrus 52 (P52) – Name given to the earliest known fragment of the New Testament (part of the Gospel of John); dates from around A.D. 100-150 

Salome – Mother of John (author of the fourth gospel); possibly the sister of Mary (the mother of Jesus)

Samaritans – People of Samaria whose pagan ancestors had intermarried with Israelites living in the northern kingdom; practiced a syncretistic form of the Jewish religion; considered by the Jews to be unclean and despicable

semeion – Greek word (transliteration) meaning “sign”; used by John in regard to Jesus’ miracles
 
skenoō – Greek word (transliteration) meaning to dwell or reside; related to the Greek noun skēnē, meaning “tent” or “tabernacle”

tabernacle – Movable tent in which the ark of the covenant was kept and in which God showed his special presence to Israel

temple –Building in Jerusalem where the Israelites worshiped God and where God promised to be present with his people in a special way; destroyed in 586 B.C., later rebuilt, and destroyed again in A.D. 70

Tertullian – (ca. A.D. 155-230) Early Christian writer and church father from Carthage who wrote Against Marcion and popularized the Latin terminology used to discuss the Trinity

Thomas – One of the original twelve disciples; known for doubting that Jesus was really resurrected 

Trajan – Roman emperor from A.D. 98 to 117; known for expanding the Roman empire, ruling justly, and caring for the citizens of Rome, including the poor

Transfiguration – Event recorded in Matthew 17:1-8, Mark 9:2-8, and Luke 9:28-36 when Jesus was revealed to his disciples in glory 
