## BACKGROUND

	We’ll explore the background of Luke’s gospel by considering its author, its original audience and the occasion or circumstances of its writing. Let’s turn first to its author.


### AUTHOR

From the outset, we should mention that the Gospel of Luke is widely recognized as the first volume of a two-volume work. The second volume is the book of Acts. And because of this, questions about the authorship of Luke are wrapped up with questions about the authorship of Acts. Listen to the preface of Luke’s gospel in Luke 1:1-4:

> Many have undertaken to draw up an account of the things that have been fulfilled among us, just as they were handed down to us by those who from the first were eyewitnesses and servants of the word. Therefore, since I myself have carefully investigated everything from the beginning, it seemed good also to me to write an orderly account for you, most excellent Theophilus, so that you may know the certainty of the things you have been taught (Luke 1:1-4).

And compare this to the similar preface in Acts 1:1-2 which says: 

> In my former book, Theophilus, I wrote about all that Jesus began to do and to teach until the day he was taken up to heaven (Acts 1:1-2).

Both these prefaces indicate that the author wrote to someone named Theophilus. And the preface of Acts refers to a former book. This has led most scholars to conclude that the former book was the Gospel of Luke.
	There is also other evidence that the same person wrote both of these books. The style of the Greek of Luke is similar to the Greek in Acts, but very different from the style of the other gospels. The books also emphasize similar themes, such as the universal offer of the gospel, the work of the Holy Spirit, the irresistible power of the will and word of God, and the frequent description of Christ’s work as “salvation.” So, assuming that one writer produced both books, who was he?
	We'll investigate the authorship of the third gospel in two stages. First, we’ll consider the traditional view that the gospel was written by a man named Luke. And second, we’ll explore Luke’s personal history. Let’s look first at the traditional view that Luke wrote this gospel.


#### Traditional View	

The Gospel of Luke is technically anonymous because it doesn’t name its author. But this shouldn’t be surprising. Theophilus certainly knew who wrote it, so there was no need for the author to identify himself. There are, however, several sources of information about the author’s identity.
	At least three types of evidence confirm the traditional view that Luke wrote the third gospel. First, comments from other parts of the New Testament point to his authorship.
	The New Testament indicates that the author of the third gospel was with Paul in the later years of his ministry. For instance, in the book of Acts, the author sometimes narrated the story with a third person “they” and other times with a first person “we.” The last of these first-person narratives is Acts 27:1–28:16, which describes Paul’s trip to Rome. 
	Beyond this, Paul’s epistles indicate that Luke was one of the few co-workers with him during this time. For instance, in 2 Timothy 4:11, when Paul’s death was approaching, Paul told Timothy, “Only Luke is with me.” Information like this doesn’t prove that Luke wrote the third gospel and the book of Acts, but it does make it a strong possibility. 
Second, early manuscripts of the Gospel of Luke also point to Luke as the author.

> Dating early manuscripts is a highly technical science really, and there’s three bits of evidence really, that scholars use to date an ancient manuscript. One, and actually the most important — this surprises students sometimes — but the most important is paleography. Paleography refers to ancient handwriting; “paleo” is old and “graphy” is writing; so ancient writing. Scholars, experts of paleography can tell within sometimes a few decades, but certainly within fifty years or so when a document was written, simply because handwriting tended to change over time in a particular language. Sometimes the alphabet itself would change of course in terms of its writing, but certainly the way things were written; so that’s paleography. The second would be chemical analysis of some kind. There’s carbon fourteen dating, for example, or other kinds of testing where they would test either the ink or the animal skin or whatever the document was written on to try to determine its age. The third means to date a manuscript is any actual external comments or statements that were made. The scribes who copied them seldom dated them but sometimes they might actually make some kind of a notation or comment that would help us to identify specifically when that document was copied. So those are the three different ways that manuscripts are dated. 
> 
> —	Dr. Mark L. Strauss

One of the most reliable early manuscripts of the Gospel of Luke is papyrus number 75, often referred to as “P-75.” This manuscript is dated around A.D. 180. It contains much more of the third gospel than most other early manuscripts, and it bears the title “According to Luke.”
	Many other ancient manuscripts also identify Luke as the author of the gospel, and no early manuscripts ascribe it to anyone else. Third, the writings of the early church also identify Luke as the author. 	 
	Important documents from the early church consistently assign authorship of the third gospel to Luke. The Muratorian fragment, dated around A.D. 170 to 180, is the earliest known document listing the New Testament books that the early church considered to be canonical, and it clearly affirms Luke’s authorship of the third gospel. 
	Another ancient witness is the so-called Anti-Marcionite Prologue to the Gospel of Luke, written around A.D. 160 to 180 to refute the heretic Marcion. It introduces the third gospel this way: 

Luke, an Antiochian of Syria, a physician by profession, was a disciple of the apostles. At a later date he accompanied Paul ... Luke, under the impulse of the Spirit, composed his entire gospel in the region of Achaia.

Moreover, many church leaders from the second and third centuries recognized Luke as the author of the third gospel. For example, Luke’s authorship was asserted by Irenaeus, who lived around A.D. 130 to 202; Clement of Alexandria, who lived from around A.D. 150 to 215; and Tertullian, who lived from A.D. 155 to 230.

> I think we can have every confidence that Luke is the writer of the third gospel. We know from the book of Acts that Luke was a doctor, actually, whom Paul met as he’s coming across the top of Asia Minor to a place called Troas. He meets Luke, and they travel together to Philippi and quite likely Luke then stays in Philippi as a doctor there, and then he rejoins Paul on his travels from Philippi as they go up to Jerusalem in A.D. 57. So, the picture we have from the New Testament is of Luke as being someone who knows Paul well, travels with him, and there’s every evidence that this Luke is one and the same person that writes Luke’s gospel. 
> 
> —	Dr. Peter Walker


> If you were simply guessing the name of a companion of Paul, you probably wouldn’t come up with Luke. He’s not a very prominent figure in Paul’s letters. You might more likely come up with Titus or someone else. So, the mere fact that he’s not a very prominent figure in Paul’s letters suggests that the attribution to Luke, of both the gospel and the Acts, is likely to be right. But I also think there is good reason for thinking that the names of the persons to whom the gospels are attributed go back to a very early stage when the Gospels were first circulating. So, I think the combination of the ascription to Luke and the fact that the same author in Acts appears to be a companion of Paul, make it very likely that the author of both works is the Luke who accompanied Paul on some of his travels, who is one of Paul’s coworkers. 
> 
> —	Dr. Richard Bauckham

Now that we’ve affirmed the traditional view that Luke wrote this gospel, let’s look at Luke’s personal history.
