#### Personal History
		
		
	
The New Testament tells us at least four things about Luke’s personal history. First, he was not an apostle. In fact, Luke doesn’t seem to have been an eyewitness to any of the events he reported in his gospel. 
Listen to these details from the Gospel of Luke 1:1-2:

> Many have undertaken to draw up an account of the things that have been fulfilled among us, just as they were handed down to us by those who from the first were eyewitnesses and servants of the word (Luke 1:1-2).


> Luke’s gospel is the only one of the four that has the sort of preface that a historian would often write to introduce a work of history. So, it rather implies that Luke was particularly kind of self-conscious about following historical method of the time. And he talks about his sources in the preface. He doesn’t claim to be an eyewitness himself, but he does claim to be taking up eyewitness testimony and recording it. So, we have his claim to eyewitness testimony. But then there’s the period after Paul gets to Jerusalem, on his last journey to Jerusalem and Luke is with him, Paul is in prison for a period of about 2 years. And it looks very much as though Luke is hanging around in Jerusalem and other places in Palestine for that period. So, he has ample opportunity, actually, 2 years, when he could interview — as a good ancient historian was expected to do — he could interview the eyewitnesses who were members of the Jerusalem church, people like James the Lord’s brother, who was certainly around. Some of the twelve apostles were probably around either in Jerusalem or in other parts of Palestine. So, Luke was actually in a very good position to have interviewed eyewitnesses. And then, of course, he accompanies Paul to Rome where there might well have been other people who had their own stories to tell of what they remembered of the story of Jesus. So, I think what we can say is that Luke was in a very good position to have had first-hand contact with the eyewitnesses. 
> 
> —	Dr. Richard Bauckham

Second, Luke also appears to have been a Gentile convert to Christianity. When Paul wrote to the Colossians from prison, he sent them greetings from Luke who was with Paul at the time. Listen to what Paul wrote in 4:14 of Colossians:

> Our dear friend Luke, the doctor, and Demas send greetings (Colossians 4:14).

This is significant because in verses 10-11, Paul had said that Aristarchus, Mark, and Justus were the only Jews who were working with him at the time. So, it’s reasonable to conclude that Luke was a Gentile. This is confirmed by the fact that in Acts 1:19, Luke described Aramaic as “their language.” Aramaic was the Jews’ language, but it wasn’t his. 
Third, Luke also appears to have been well-educated. Many of the books in the New Testament are written in a fairly common style of Greek. But the Gospel of Luke shows more sophistication in its use of the language.
	The fact that Luke was well-educated is also reflected in Paul’s identification of him as “the doctor” in Colossians 4:14. While medicine wasn’t as formal a discipline in the days of the New Testament as it is today, it still required a person with skill, aptitude, and a degree of learning.
	The fourth thing we know about Luke’s personal history is that he was Paul’s partner in ministry for many of the episodes reported in the book of Acts. 
	As Paul described him in Philemon verse 24, Luke was his “fellow laborer.” According to Acts 16:6-10, Luke first joined Paul in Troas and went with him as he responded to the missionary call to go to Macedonia. From that point on Luke was often with Paul, except for a lengthy stay in Philippi recorded in Acts 16:40–20:5. Luke’s faithfulness was particularly displayed in Acts 27:1 where he joined Paul’s perilous journey to Rome. 

> I think of all the people in the New Testament, I’d like to meet Luke. At one time I thought that I’d be a physician, so he’s always intrigued me. And when it comes to him qualifying to write one of the gospels, there are several things, I think, that fit into my view of that. The first is just the personal. At Acts 16 Luke begins to talk about “we.” Suddenly he’s in the picture; he’s not just getting a secondhand report. But Luke joins the company of the people who were actually part of what was going on, and they were getting a chance to experience early Christianity firsthand. And I think that’s an exciting thing. The second thing is just the fact that he was a physician. Thinking about training to become one myself, I know that that’s the kind of person who wants to get the diagnosis correct. They’re going to be very careful to get their facts straight, you know, they want their details to be accurate, because whatever they conclude is going to be for the good of the patient so to speak. Probably the third thing that strikes me about Luke is the perspective that he had in traveling in the Greco-Roman world. His perspective on the gospel narrative is not even limited to Israel or Palestine. It’s a global perspective. In a day when we’re concerned about the Christian gospel being globalized, we can read Luke with some real understanding because he had an opportunity in Greece and in Rome and in other parts of the Greco-Roman world. He had the opportunity to see how the message of Jesus was going to be applied to the culture in which the message was being given. 
> 
> —	Dr. Steve Harper

Now that we’ve explored the authorship of the third gospel, let’s look at the identity of Luke’s original audience.


### ORIGINAL AUDIENCE
	
We’ll explore the original audience of Luke in two ways. First, we’ll look at the book’s explicit dedication to Theophilus. And second, we’ll consider the possibility that the book was also intended for a broader audience. Let’s begin with Theophilus as Luke’s first reader.


#### Theophilus

> There’s been a great deal of debate over the centuries as to who Theophilus was and what it refers to in Luke 1:1-4 and he is mentioned also, of course and in Acts 1:1-2. Theophilus, the word “Theophilus” does mean “lover of God,” and for that reason, many have thought that perhaps Theophilus was not an actual individual, but represents the readership of Luke’s gospel which would be the lovers of God in the church. The other major possibility, of course, is that Theophilus was an individual. Most scholars, and for what it’s worth I would agree with this second view, hold to the second view because Luke describes him as “most excellent,” “kratiste,” there, and Luke later uses that very word, “kratiste,” to refer to Roman officials, to Felix and to Agrippa. And so, it was apparently in Luke’s mind a rather technical expression referring to a person of high standing, and perhaps especially a person of high standing in the Roman government. Beyond that, Luke 1:1-4 does seem to be a dedication. It just fits in terms of the genre of introductory dedications. And historical works were often dedicated using this kind of language to a patron, someone who actually paid for the production of the work. And so, it really fits into what we know of dedicatory statements and for that reason, as I say, almost certainly Theophilus was an actual person. 
> 
> —	Dr. David R. Bauer

Luke’s preface implies that Theophilus was his patron, the one who commissioned and financially supported his writing. In Luke 1:3, Luke addressed his work to “most excellent Theophilus,” or kratiste Theophile. The term kratiste was an expression of high honor. In fact, it’s used to describe only two other people in the whole New Testament: the Roman governors Felix and Festus. If Theophilus was not a high-ranking Roman official, he was certainly a person of prestige and significance. 
	But the relationship between Luke and Theophilus was more complex than mere patronage. In some sense, Theophilus was also Luke’s student. In Luke 1:3-4, we read these words:

Therefore, since I myself have carefully investigated everything from the beginning, it seemed good also to me to write an orderly account for you, most excellent Theophilus, so that you may know the certainty of the things you have been taught (Luke 1:3-4).

Theophilus already knew about Jesus. But Luke wrote this fuller and more orderly account of Jesus’ life in order to give Theophilus confidence in what he’d been taught. Having seen that Luke explicitly cited Theophilus as his first reader, it’s also helpful to think of Luke writing to a broader audience.

