## STRUCTURE AND CONTENT
	
You’ll recall from earlier lessons in this series that, on a large scale, all four gospels deal with Jesus’ life chronologically. But, on a smaller scale, they sometimes organize their stories about Jesus according to different principles. For instance, we saw that Matthew and Mark sometimes arranged their materials according to certain themes. By comparison, Luke arranged much of his gospel according to geography. 
	For our purposes in this lesson, we will divide Luke’s gospel into six sections: a short preface in 1:1-4, followed by five major groups of stories:
* The first major division of the gospel describes Jesus’ beginnings and focuses on the region of Judea and the Jordan River. This section runs from 1:5–4:13. 
* The second major division is the narrative of Jesus’ ministry in Galilee, which extends from 4:14–9:50. 
* The third major division reports Jesus’ journey to Jerusalem in 9:51–19:27.
* The fourth major division is the narrative of Jesus’ ministry in and near Jerusalem in 19:28–21:38.
* Finally, the fifth and last major division of Luke’s gospel is the narrative of Jesus’ crucifixion and resurrection outside Jerusalem, found in 22:1–24:53.

Since we’ve already looked at Luke’s preface, we’ll focus our attention on the five major divisions of his narrative, starting with Jesus’ beginnings in Luke 1:5–4:13.


### JESUS’ BEGINNINGS

Luke’s account of Jesus’ beginnings starts shortly before Jesus’ birth, and spans his entire life prior to his public ministry. Luke’s main concern in these chapters was to show that Jesus was both the Son of God and the son of David, making him both fully divine and fully human. Moreover, as the son of David, Jesus was also the Messiah or Christ, the one who would provide salvation to the world by bringing God’s kingdom to earth.
	Throughout this narrative, Luke regularly referred to God’s promises in the Old Testament, in order to show that God was fulfilling these promises through Jesus. And therefore, the only way to be faithful to God and to inherit his kingdom blessings was to receive Jesus as King and Savior. 
	These chapters can be divided into four main sections: birth announcements for John the Baptist and Jesus; their corresponding births and childhoods; John’s identification of Jesus; and three confirmations of Jesus as the Son of God. Let’s begin with the birth announcements in Luke 1:5-56.


#### Birth Announcements
	
It’s significant that Luke opened his gospel with an appearance of the angel Gabriel. Hundreds of years earlier, Daniel 9 stated that Gabriel had announced that Israel’s exile would last for hundreds of years. So long as they remained under God’s judgment, Israel would be in bondage. But in Luke’s gospel, Gabriel announced that the period of judgment was about to end. 
	In Luke 1:5-25, Gabriel foretold the birth of John the Baptist. Gabriel visited the priest Zechariah in Judea, and told him that his barren wife Elizabeth would miraculously have a son. They were to name the boy John. He would be filled with the Holy Spirit from birth, and would serve in the spirit of the great prophet Elijah to prepare the way for God’s salvation. At first, Zechariah doubted Gabriel’s message, so he was struck mute until his son was born.
	Luke paired the announcement of John’s birth with Gabriel’s greater announcement of Jesus’ birth in Luke 1:26-38. Gabriel told Mary that God would miraculously generate a son in her womb, making God himself the child’s father. God’s son was to be named Jesus, meaning “Savior.” Moreover, he would inherit the throne of his ancestor David, meaning that he would be the Messiah, the great son of David who would bring the salvation of God’s everlasting kingdom to earth. 
	Since Mary and Elizabeth were cousins, Mary visited her cousin Elizabeth in Judea to tell her she was pregnant with God’s son. We read about this visit in Luke 1:39-56. When Mary greeted Elizabeth, John leapt for joy in his mother’s womb, and Elizabeth was immediately filled with the Spirit so that she understood the significance of her baby’s reaction. Elizabeth blessed Mary, calling Mary’s son her own Lord. And in response, Mary sang her famous song of praise, often called the Magnificat, in Luke 1:46-55, expressing her great joy at the salvation that was coming through her child. 
	Following the birth announcements, Luke compared the births and childhoods of John and Jesus in Luke 1:57–2:52.


#### Births and Childhoods
	
Luke’s account of John’s birth and childhood can be found in Luke 1:57-80. John was born to aging parents. And when they presented him at the temple on the eighth day for circumcision, his father’s voice returned to him. At that time, Zechariah was filled with the Holy Spirit and prophesied that his son would prepare the way for the Messiah, the great son of David. Listen to how Zechariah described the Messiah’s role in Luke 1:69-76:

>  [God] has raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David (as he said through his holy prophets of long ago) … to remember his holy covenant, the oath he swore to our father Abraham … And you, my child, will be called a prophet of the Most High; for you will go on before the Lord to prepare the way for him (Luke 1:69-76).

In the Old Testament, God had made covenant promises of salvation to Abraham and David. And Zechariah prophesied that God was about to fulfill these promises, and that his son John, would be the prophet who prepared the way. 
	Next, in Luke 2:1-52, Luke reported the birth and early childhood of Jesus. There are several parallels between this account and his previous narrative of John’s birth, but Luke’s record of Jesus’ birth and childhood is much longer and more elaborate. It begins with Jesus’ birth in the city of David, the Judean town of Bethlehem, which is recorded in Luke 2:1-20. 
Jesus’ birth was very humble. He was born in a stable and laid in a feeding trough. But the angelic announcement that proclaimed his birth to nearby shepherds was nothing short of majestic. Listen to what the angel said to the shepherds in Luke 2:10-11:

> Do not be afraid. I bring you good news of great joy that will be for all the people. Today in the town of David a Savior has been born to you; he is Christ the Lord (Luke 2:10-11).

The angel proclaimed the good news or “gospel” that the messianic King would save God’s people from God’s judgment. 
	This angelic messenger was then joined by the heavenly army of angels who sang praises to God for the birth of Jesus. Luke made it clear that despite Jesus’ humble birth, Mary’s son really was God’s chosen Messiah and King. 
Next, Luke described Jesus’ circumcision and presentation at the temple in Jerusalem in Luke 2:21-40. At the temple, the Holy Spirit filled and moved Simeon, as well as the holy prophetess Anna, to announce that Jesus was the Messiah who would bring salvation to the world. Listen to Simeon’s praise to God in Luke 2:30-32:

My eyes have seen your salvation, which you have prepared in the sight of all people, a light for revelation to the Gentiles and for glory to your people Israel (Luke 2:30-32).

This was in fulfillment of Isaiah 49:6, where God had spoken these words:

> It is too small a thing for you to be my servant to restore the tribes of Jacob and bring back those of Israel I have kept. I will also make you a light for the Gentiles, that you may bring my salvation to the ends of the earth (Isaiah 49:6).

Through Simeon, God revealed that Jesus was the Messiah who would bring salvation and glory to Israel. And more than this, he would even extend the gospel of God’s kingdom to the Gentile nations, so that they might also be saved.
	Finally, Luke returned to the theme of Jesus’ sonship with a brief story of Jesus at the temple in Luke 2:41-52. When Jesus was twelve years old, he accompanied his parents to the Passover in Jerusalem, but he was separated from them when they returned home. His parents found him several days later in the temple courts, talking with the teachers. Everyone at the temple was amazed with Jesus’ knowledge and understanding. When Mary confronted Jesus, his reply revealed how special he was. Listen to what Jesus told Mary in Luke 2:49:

> Didn't you know I had to be in my Father's house? (Luke 2:49).

The temple was the house of his father because Jesus was the Son of God. 
	Following the births and childhoods of John and Jesus, Luke reported John’s identification of Jesus in Luke 3:1-20.
