#### John’s Identification of Jesus

In this narrative, John prepared the way for God’s salvation by formally identifying Jesus as the Messiah. In his preaching ministry in the region of the Jordan River, John proclaimed the coming kingdom of God, exhorted people to repent of their sins, and baptized those who repented. But when Jesus came to him to be baptized, John identified him as the Messiah, and plainly declared that he wasn’t even worthy to untie the Messiah’s sandals. John said that Jesus would baptize with the Holy Spirit, as prophesied in Old Testament passages like Isaiah 44:3 and Ezekiel 39:29. And this meant that the final age of history had arrived, the time when God’s salvation would be fully realized. 

> It’s interesting to note that in the Old Testament, that in Exodus 19, when the Israelites were going to hear from God, or God was going to descend on Mount Sinai, that they are told before that to wash their clothes and purify themselves. And so, it turns out that cleansing was really something that people would do in preparation for God’s coming, or God’s appearance. And if we look at John the Baptist’s proclamation, he’s basically saying that God is going to come in judgment and that people need to prepare themselves by repentance, and then, of course, by baptism. 
> 
> —	Dr. David A. Redelings


> In the Gospels, we have John baptizing people. And then we have Jesus coming to be baptized of John. Why would he do this? I mean, John is saying, repent and be prepared for the kingdom. Does Jesus have to repent? Obviously, he doesn't. He is the sinless Son of God. Why then does he get baptized by John? Well, it's important to realize that John's baptism is in preparation for the coming of the kingdom. As he is calling people to repent, believe, it's not the same as Christian baptism in that he is announcing that the kingdom is coming; the King is arriving. They are to be prepared for it. Jesus, in coming to be baptized by John, now comes to begin his ministry. All of the baptism begins at the start of Jesus' ministry in the Gospels. He is identifying with us — think of, in terms of Matthew — to fulfill all righteousness. It's not because he has to repent. It's not because he is a sinner. It's because he's identifying with his people. He's beginning his public ministry. He is acting as our representative in his life, which will then culminate in his death, resurrection, ascension. So that, that is the reason why he comes and is baptized by John to, in some sense, inaugurate his ministry, to begin what he is doing, to announce that what John has looked forward to is now coming in him. He is the one that now is bringing the kingdom to pass. 
> 
> —	Dr. Stephen J. Wellum

Now that we’ve considered John’s identification of Jesus, let’s turn to the fourth and final section of this narrative: the confirmation of Jesus as the Son of God in Luke 3:21–4:13.


#### Confirmations of the Son of God

Luke provided three separate confirmations of Jesus as the Son of God, beginning with a divine confirmation in Luke 3:21-22. Listen to this description of Jesus’ baptism from Luke 3:22:

> The Holy Spirit descended on him in bodily form like a dove. And a voice came from heaven: “You are my Son, whom I love; with you I am well pleased” (Luke 3:22).

At Jesus’ baptism, God himself publicly confirmed that Jesus was his son through the visible appearance of the Spirit and his voice from heaven. 
	Next, Luke provided a genealogical confirmation that Jesus was the Son of God in Luke 3:23-38. 
	Like Matthew, Luke traced Jesus’ genealogy through the righteous line of David and Abraham. But unlike Matthew, Luke extended his record to include the righteous line of humanity all the way to Adam. To understand the significance of this genealogy, listen to the way it ends in Luke 3:38:

> The son of Seth, the son of Adam, the son of God (Luke 3:38).

Luke called Adam “the son of God” — the same title given to Jesus throughout these chapters. In this way, Luke pointed out something that other portions of the New Testament teach plainly. As the Son of God, Jesus was destined to fulfill the purpose of the first son of God, Adam. Or as the apostle Paul put it in 1 Corinthians 15:45, Jesus was the “last Adam.” Adam was God’s servant king on earth who was supposed to do God’s will. But he failed miserably. But Jesus is the great Son of God who succeeded where Adam had failed, thereby extending salvation to every nation on earth. 
	The last confirmation of Jesus as the Son of God was a personal confirmation from Jesus himself in Luke 4:1-13. This is the account of Jesus’ temptation in the wilderness. As Luke noted in Luke 4:1, the Holy Spirit filled Jesus and led him into the wilderness, where he was tempted by Satan. The Devil tempted Jesus to turn stone into bread, to receive authority over the nations from the Devil, and to throw himself off the top of the temple. And the Devil began two of these temptations with the mocking words “If you are the Son of God.” In response, Jesus strongly rejected all three of Satan’s temptations, and even quoted Old Testament passages that described what a faithful son of God should do.

> Jesus quotes the Bible when he’s encountered by the Devil in the wilderness for several reasons. First of all, part of what the gospel writers are doing are depicting, portraying Jesus as the true Son of God. And so, one reason that we see him quoting the Scriptures is because of his covenant relationship with God. He is going to the Scriptures and quoting from that expression of his covenant relationship to keep things in order, to keep the proper view of his own authority in relation to God the Father, and also to the Devil’s limited authority as well. And so, he says that man shall not live by bread alone but by every word that proceeds from the mouth of God, just to remind himself of the priority of that covenant relationship, and that assists him in resisting these temptations from the Devil. But we see him quoting from a particular portion of Scripture, from Deuteronomy 6 to 8 in particular, because there we have Moses talking about the wilderness experience of God’s people, and how that wilderness experience of the Exodus community tested what was in their hearts, to see what was in their hearts. And we have something very similar happening, this test of sonship in Jesus’ temptation encounter, where Israel failed the test, Jesus passes the test. And so, we see that sort of comparison in the use of the Old Testament by the gospel writers and by Jesus in the temptation narrative as well. 
> 
> —	Dr. Gregory R. Perry

Because it follows Jesus’ genealogy that ends with Adam as the son of God, Luke’s account of Jesus’ temptation should be viewed in contrast with the account of Adam’s temptation in Genesis 3. In that story, the Devil tempted Adam in the Garden of Eden and when Adam sinned, God cursed creation and cast all of humanity into the wilderness. By contrast, Jesus resisted temptation in the wilderness, and this confirmed that he really was the faithful son of God who would bring God’s faithful people back into paradise.
	After Jesus’ beginnings in Judea and the region of the Jordan, the next major section of the Gospel of Luke reports Jesus’ ministry in Galilee. This section extends from 4:14–9:50.
