## JESUS’ MINISTRY IN GALILEE

In this section of his gospel, Luke reported many examples of Jesus’ miraculous power and gospel preaching in order to prove that Jesus was the Spirit-anointed Savior promised by the Old Testament.
	Luke’s narrative describing Jesus’ ministry in Galilee can be divided into five parts: first, Jesus’ sermon at Nazareth; second, his teaching and miracles; third, the distinction between the roles of Jesus and John the Baptist; fourth, additional teaching and miracles from Jesus; and fifth, Jesus’ preparation of the twelve apostles for ministry. We’ll look at each of these sections, beginning with Jesus’ first sermon at Nazareth in Luke 4:14-30.


#### Sermon at Nazareth

All three Synoptic Gospels emphasize Jesus’ miraculous power and gospel proclamation during his Galilean ministry. But Luke’s presentation is distinct from the others because he introduced this stage of Jesus’ ministry with the Lord’s first sermon in his hometown Nazareth. Luke reported that Jesus was in the synagogue on the Sabbath, and that he was given the scroll of Isaiah. So, he read Isaiah 61:1-2, and then made an astonishing proclamation. Listen to what Jesus read and said in Luke 4:18-21:

> The Spirit of the Lord is on me, because he has anointed me to preach good news to the poor. He has sent me to proclaim freedom for the prisoners and recovery of sight for the blind, to release the oppressed, to proclaim the year of the Lord’s favor… Today this scripture is fulfilled in your hearing (Luke 4:18-21).


> When he said, “this scripture is now fulfilled in your hearing,” what Jesus was saying was that something the Old Testament had provided for and anticipated was now being realized. And that was the whole idea of jubilee, that in the 49th or 50th year, depending on how you calculate it, Old Testament Israel was to release people from debts and restore them to their ancestral homelands, their tribal allotments, the land that their families had been given back during the days of Moses and Joshua. If we think of the Exodus as the big, important Old Testament event for redemption, we also need to understand the Jubilee was an important provision of God for restoration. Because, as long as we live in a fallen world, redemption is going to save us, but restoration is part of God’s redemption. And so, Jesus sets about to show the signs of this jubilee. He’s freeing people from the oppression of demons, freeing them from social stigmatization, or social classification, and he’s restoring them to God their Maker and their Father.
> 
> — Rev. Michael J. Glodo

Isaiah had prophesied that the coming of the kingdom of God would result in salvation for all God’s faithful people. And Jesus proclaimed that that day had arrived. This quotation expresses Luke’s basic model for interpreting Jesus’ entire ministry: Jesus was the messiah or Christ, the Savior prophesied by the Old Testament who would manifest God’s kingdom on earth by bringing salvation to his people.
	After relating Jesus’ sermon at Nazareth, Luke reported several examples of Jesus’ powerful teaching and miracles in Luke 4:31–7:17.


#### Teaching and Miracles

In this section, Luke demonstrated that Jesus really was the Messiah because he was fulfilling the prophecy of Isaiah 61:1-2. Jesus provided freedom from an evil spirit in Luke 4:31-36. He healed many other people in 4:38-42. And he called the disciples Peter, James, and John in Luke 5:1-11. And we find a similar pattern in the verses that follow, where the healings of the leper in 5:12-15, and the paralytic in 5:17-26 are followed by the calling of the disciple Levi or Matthew in 5:27-32.
	The same sort of pattern is repeated in the next verses, too. But instead of healings, Luke recorded Jesus’ teachings. In 5:33-39, Jesus taught that his physical presence ought to end fasting and bring rejoicing. In 6:1-11, Jesus taught that the Sabbath is for healing and saving lives. And in 6:12-16, he selected twelve of his many disciples to become his special apostles, who were assigned the task of establishing a new order for Israel. 
	Through these miracles and teachings, Jesus demonstrated that he really was the Messiah prophesied by Isaiah, because he brought the Lord’s favor in the form of freedom, healing, and release from oppression.
	Next, Luke reported a fairly lengthy sermon that Jesus delivered in Luke 6:17-49. This sermon is often referred to as Jesus’ Sermon on the Plain, and it has many similarities to his Sermon on the Mount in Matthew 5–7. 


> One of the interesting contrasts between Matthew and Luke is that we have a Sermon on the Mount in Matthew 5–7, and what’s known as the Sermon on the Plain in Luke 6. And this causes no end of discussion and debate. Are these one and the same thing, or are they separate? I think two things need to be said. Firstly, we know that we’re dealing with just a very small extract of whatever it was that Jesus said on that occasion. I mean, read Matthew 5–7 and it takes, what, perhaps forty minutes to read it out loud. Jesus is talking for hours and for hours and his teaching cannot be so compressed. So, we’re dealing with extracts. So, are we talking about the same extracts? Well, I think we probably are. The other thing to say is that if you know the geography of that area, it is fascinating — there’s hills just behind Capernaum, and so you can look at those hills and say, well, Jesus sat down, and people were on a hill. But in another sense, if you look at it, it’s actually a slow descent of volcanic rock, coming down from three thousand feet above, down to the sea level. And when you look at it from a distance, it’s actually got tons of what you and I might refer to as plains. They’re sloping, and they’re on a hill. And I would have my cake and eat it. I would say the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus is sitting on the mount, and the Sermon on the Plain, it’s the same thing, it’s a flat place. And I think there’s a final point here which is fascinating — Luke wants to give us the impression of Jesus being accessible, so he describes it as being Jesus on the plain, he’s with us. Matthew’s wanting to have us see that Jesus is authoritative, Jesus on the mountain like Moses on Mount Sinai. And I think we can have both answers. 
> 
> —	Dr. Peter Walker

In the Sermon on the Plain, Jesus emphasized the same great reversal that Isaiah had prophesied. The poor will be blessed. The hungry will be satisfied. Those who weep will laugh. And God will bless those who are helpless. But the good news also went a step further. Jesus called those who are blessed to follow him and to live by the standards and values of God’s kingdom, which are often very different from earthly standards. For example, he called them to love strangers and even their enemies, in contrast to worldly values which tell us to be wary of strangers and to hate our enemies. So, the message of the kingdom is not just one of blessing, but also one of ethical responsibility.
	After the Sermon on the Plain, Luke concluded this section with still more evidences that Jesus was fulfilling Isaiah’s prophecy. Jesus healed a centurion’s servant in Luke 7:1-10. And in 7:11-16, he even raised the dead son of a widow at Nain.
	Luke’s next account from Jesus’ ministry in Galilee is a group of stories revolving around John the Baptist in Luke 7:18-50.
