#### John the Baptist

After John the Baptist was imprisoned, he sent some of his disciples to ask Jesus if he was really the Messiah. And Jesus replied by reminding them of what he had done. Jesus’ miracles and preaching clearly fulfilled the prophecies of Isaiah 61:1-2, and therefore they proved that Jesus really was the Messiah. Listen to what Jesus told John’s messengers in Luke 7:22:

> Go back and report to John what you have seen and heard: The blind receive sight, the lame walk, those who have leprosy are cured, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and the good news is preached to the poor (Luke 7:22).

Jesus continued by affirming that John was the greatest of the prophets. But even John didn’t measure up to the least person in the kingdom of God. And Luke punctuated this point in 7:47-50 by explaining that Jesus actually forgave the sin of the immoral woman who washed his feet. John had baptized people in repentance as an appeal to God for forgiveness, but Jesus brought the kingdom into people’s present experience by forgiving sinners, healing the sick, and preaching the gospel to the poor.
	After the stories revolving around John the Baptist, Luke reported more of Jesus’ teaching and miracles in Luke 8:1-56.


Teachings and Miracles

In these additional teachings and miracles, Jesus focused on the good news of the kingdom. The parable of the sower in Luke 8:1-15, and the parable of the lamp stand in Luke 8:16-18, described the importance of responding to the message of the kingdom in faith and obedience. And he repeated these same themes in Luke 8:19-21, when he said that his true family members are those that hear and obey God’s word.
	Then, in Luke 8:22-56, Luke reported several miracles that confirmed and demonstrated the salvation Jesus was bringing: Jesus calmed a storm, cast out a demon, healed a sick woman, and raised a girl from the dead.
	Finally, Luke closed his account of Jesus ministry in Galilee by reporting Jesus’ preparation of the twelve apostles for ministry in Luke 9:1-50.


#### Preparation of the Twelve Apostles

First, in Luke 9:1-9, Jesus sent his twelve apostles to heal and to preach the gospel. These were the same men he had set apart in Luke 6. Then he demonstrated his power by feeding 5,000 people in 9:10-17, teaching his apostles to trust in his power and provision. And these preparations culminated in Luke 9:18-27, where the apostles’ confessed that Jesus was the long-awaited Messiah, or Christ.
	Luke concluded this section with several stories about Jesus continuing to prepare his apostles for ministry, especially the ministry they would have after he ascended into heaven. Jesus was transfigured before Peter, James and John in Luke 9:28-36, where the Father spoke from heaven to confirm their commitment to Jesus. Then Jesus’ performed an extremely difficult exorcism in 9:37-45, and taught on greatness in the kingdom in 9:46-50. In all these accounts, Jesus prepared his disciples to recognize his authority, to rely on his power, and to minister as humble servants in his name, so that they would be effective leaders of his kingdom on earth. 
	After Jesus’ ministry in Galilee, the next major section of the Gospel of Luke describes Jesus’ journey to Jerusalem. This portion extends from Luke 9:51–19:27.
