### JESUS’ JOURNEY TO JERUSALEM
	
Luke mentioned Jesus’ determination to go to Jerusalem five times in this section: in 9:51, 13:22, 17:11, 18:31, and 19:28. As one example, listen to Luke 18:31-32:

> Jesus took the Twelve aside and told them, “We are going up to Jerusalem, and everything that is written by the prophets about the Son of Man will be fulfilled. He will be handed over to the Gentiles. They will mock him, insult him, spit on him, flog him and kill him” (Luke 18:31-32).

Through passages like this, Luke made it clear that Jesus was committed to God’s plan to save his people, even though it required him to die in Jerusalem.
	We’ll divide Luke’s discussion of Jesus’ journey to Jerusalem into four main parts: first, Jesus’ teaching on the nature of discipleship; second, Luke’s reports of the increasing conflict between Jesus and his opponents; third, Jesus’ teaching on the cost of discipleship; and fourth, Jesus’ commitment to God’s plan to save his people. Let’s begin with the nature of discipleship in Luke 9:51–11:13.


#### Nature of Discipleship 
	
Jesus’ commitment to build God’s kingdom and save his people led him to select and train his special apostles for servant leadership. In Luke 9:51–10:24, he taught them how to evangelize and warned them that life would be difficult for them. But he also empowered them with the Holy Spirit. After this preparation, he sent them to preach the gospel to the cities he planned to visit. 
	Following this, in Luke 10:25–11:13, Jesus provided a broad worldview for them by teaching on three topics related to discipleship: love for neighbor, love for God, and prayer. Jesus began in Luke 10:27 by summarizing his teaching about love in this way:

> “Love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your strength and with all your mind”; and, “Love your neighbor as yourself” (Luke 10:27).

Here, Jesus quoted Deuteronomy 6:5 and Leviticus 19:18 in order to explain that the whole Old Testament law teaches us how to love God and our neighbor.
	The next two paragraphs illustrate the two parts of this law of love. The parable of the “Good Samaritan” in Luke 10:29-37 illustrates how to love one’s neighbor. This is the well-known story about a Samaritan who showed his neighborly love for an injured Israelite, even though there was tension between their two people groups. Next, in Luke 10:38-42, Jesus’ encounter with Mary provides an example of how to love God. By sitting at Jesus’ feet listening to his teaching, Mary showed that we should love God by making him the first priority in our lives, and by listening to him obediently.
	Lastly, Jesus’ teaching on prayer in Luke 11:1-13 concluded his instruction to the apostles by teaching them to pray genuinely and persistently for the gifts and blessings of God’s kingdom.

> Prayer is very important for the Christian. It was an important part of Jesus' life, and we can see its significance through the example of his life. We find that the greater his work-load, the more he prayed, and he sought God’s strength while he rested. He realized that he needed to commune with the Father consistently in order to renew himself spiritually. He prayed all night before he chose his twelve disciples, knowing that one of them would betray him. In fact, when he chose his disciples he was looking ahead to the cross. And that is part of the reason Jesus spent the whole night praying before conducting this very important ministry. Jesus’ prayer life is an example for us. Later, when his disciples came back joyfully because of their marvelous works, Jesus praised the Father, saying, “I praise you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have hidden these things from the wise and learned, and revealed them to little children.” Jesus praised the Father, so we should praise him too. If even Jesus needed to pray and give praise, we need to even more. Before he was arrested, he prayed earnestly in the Garden of Gethsemane, and said finally, “My Father, if it’s possible, may this cup be taken from me. Yet not as I will, but as you will.” So, we see that Jesus was in complete submission to the Father. Jesus prayed because of his relationship with the Father, and wanted to complete the plan of salvation for humanity. His example teaches us that as children of God, our prayer and submission to the will of the Father are critical to our lives. 
> 
> —	Dr. Peter Chow, translation


> Well, I would say the main reason it’s important for Christians to pray is because every time we pray, it’s an expression of our belief in Christ, our resting in the gospel. The only reason we can pray is because Jesus died for our sins; Jesus gave us access before the throne of God. We can boldly approach the throne of grace with confidence in prayer because Jesus has made a way for us to get there. And so, the first reason we pray is because it’s an exercise of the gospel. The second reason we pray is because it’s ongoing expression of dependence on God for everything. We come to him as our father who loves to bless his children, asking for our daily bread. But it’s also a way we worship God, we express his worth, we adore him, we commune with him. There’s this reality, being in constant prayer, the Bible talks about, where we walk around with a daily sense of God’s presence, the consciousness that he is God and he carries weight in our lives. 
> 
> —	Dr. K. Erik Thoennes

> 
> John Wesley called prayer the grand means of drawing near to God, the chief means of grace. In fact, when you look at the history of Christianity, reading Scripture and praying are the two primary spiritual disciplines. I think the reason why prayer is so important is that it creates the very kind of relationship with God that Christianity is intended to foster. When we pray, we are talking with God, listening to what God has to say to us, and then responding to what we hear. And that’s the basis for the relationship. And that’s really what God wants for us, is to have a relationship. You go all the way back into Genesis where God actually walks in the garden and seeks out Adam and Eve to have fellowship with them. Prayer becomes our way of walking and talking with God. That old hymn, “He walks with me and talks with me and tells me I am his own.” I mean, you’re getting to the heart of what Christianity is intended to be when you pray, because it’s relational. 
> 
> —	Dr. Steve Harper

After Jesus’ teaching on the nature of discipleship, Luke stressed the increasing conflict between Jesus and the Jewish leaders in Luke 11:14–15:32.
