#### Increasing Conflict
	
During this part of his journey, Jesus purposefully antagonized the Jewish leadership for at least three reasons. First, he wanted to rebuke their poor leadership of God’s people. Second, he wanted to call people into his own kingdom. And third, he wanted them to crucify him in Jerusalem, so that he could render saving atonement for the sins of his people, and be rewarded with kingship over them. 
	For instance, in Luke 11:14-28, the Jews claimed that Jesus was the “prince of demons.” And Jesus responded in verses 29-53 by condemning their wickedness and pronouncing woes on them.
	In Luke 12:1-3, Jesus warned the crowds not to be hypocrites like the Pharisees. In verses 4-21, he attacked the practices of the Jewish synagogues, rulers and authorities. In verses 22-32, he stressed that God would meet the needs of everyone that sought the kingdom of God, so that they didn’t need to pursue worldly wealth like the Jewish leadership. And in verses 33-59, Jesus warned that his followers would certainly come into conflict with those who did not embrace God’s kingdom. 
	In Luke 13:1-9, Jesus continued to antagonize the Jewish leadership by calling all Israel to repent of their sins. Then in verses 10-17, he increased the conflict by healing a crippled woman on the Sabbath, which greatly angered the ruler of the synagogue. And in verses 18-30, Jesus taught that the kingdom of God would not be entered by many who thought they would be admitted, clearly condemning the mainstream Jewish leadership and their followers. Finally, in verses 31-35, Luke reported that tensions were mounting between Jesus and the Jewish king Herod, who was now planning to kill him.
	In Luke 14, Jesus provoked the Jewish leadership even further. In verses 1-24, he healed a man on the Sabbath, and then criticized the worldly values of the Jewish leaders — even suggesting that not one of them would inherit the kingdom of God. Then in verses 25-34, Jesus warned his followers that they might lose everything in this life as a result of the conflict they would encounter from those who opposed him.
	After an introduction in 15:1-2, Jesus again pursued conflict with the Jewish leaders through his parables about things that were lost: the lost sheep, the lost coin, and the lost son. In each story Jesus called on his people to reject the hypocritical exclusiveness of the Pharisees and teachers of the law, and to rejoice when God finds his children among the lost sinners of the world.
	After reporting Jesus’ teaching on the nature of discipleship and his increasing conflict with the Jewish leaders, Luke focused his account of Jesus’ journey to Jerusalem on the cost of discipleship in Luke 16:1–18:30.


#### Cost of Discipleship

Jesus wanted his followers to understand that their own lives in his kingdom would be patterned after his own. They would be persecuted by worldly leaders, and would struggle to remain faithful to God. From 16:1–17:10, Jesus taught that discipleship involves viewing everything we own as God’s possession, which he has entrusted to us as his stewards, to be used entirely for his purposes. He also warned that earthly blessings can be a stumbling block, even preventing the rich from recognizing and receiving the true gospel. Lastly, he encouraged faith and repentance, assuring us that no matter how much good we do, our very best is still no more than God requires. 
	In 17:11–18:8, Jesus focused on the eventual judgment on this world. The good things we receive in this life; including, health, possessions, and justice should cause us to see God’s goodness, and we should pray that he will bless us with them in this life. But they’re still destined to perish at the final judgment. True wealth, health and justice come only as rewards in God’s everlasting kingdom, so that’s where our hope should be. 
	In line with these ideas, Jesus ended this section in Luke 18:9-30 by emphasizing the need for humility, because only the humble will receive God’s forgiveness and blessing, and inherit eternal life.
	Luke concluded his record of Jesus’ journey to Jerusalem by emphasizing his commitment to God’s plan to save his people in Luke 18:31–19:27.


#### Jesus’ Commitment

The first way Jesus showed his commitment to God’s plan was by predicting his own death in Luke 18:31-34. Jesus knew he needed to die to save his people, and he was determined to follow through with his Father’s plan.
	Following this, Jesus demonstrated his commitment to God’s plan of salvation by blessing the people he came to save, such as the blind man he healed in Luke 18:35-43, and the tax collector Zacchaeus that he called in Luke 19:1-10. These people were typically rejected by society. But in line with the promises of Isaiah 61:1-2, they were going to receive a great inheritance in God’s kingdom. As Jesus said of Zacchaeus in Luke 19:9-10:

> Today salvation has come to this house, because this man, too, is a son of Abraham. For the Son of Man came to seek and to save what was lost (Luke 19:9-10).

Lastly, in Luke 19:11-27, Jesus told the parable of servants of the king that were entrusted with his money while he was away. This parable demonstrated that if we want an inheritance in God’s kingdom, we have to be committed to God’s plan just like Jesus is.
	After describing Jesus’ journey to Jerusalem, Luke reported Jesus’ ministry in Jerusalem. This is the fifth major section of the Gospel of Luke, and it extends from 19:28–21:38.
