### JESUS’ MINISTRY IN AND NEAR JERUSALEM

Luke's report of Jesus’ ministry in Jerusalem begins in Luke 19:28-44, with Jesus entering Jerusalem while the crowds welcomed him with shouts and praises. Following his entry into the city, Jesus’ first act was to cleanse the temple by driving out the merchants. This event appears in Luke 19:45-46. This cleansing condemned the sinful practices that had corrupted Jewish worship and life, and thereby greatly insulted the Jewish leadership.

> We need the Old Testament historical background to understand the events of Jesus’ temple cleansing, just as we need it to understand many teachings in the New Testament. We need to refer back to the Old Testament. The Book of 1 Kings, chapter 8, records the dedication of the temple. The temple had been under construction for several years. When it was finished, King Solomon and the Israelites came to dedicate the temple. King Solomon prayed to God, “Hear the supplication of your servant and of your people Israel when they pray toward this place. Hear from heaven, your dwelling place, and when you hear, forgive.” In addition, King Solomon also prayed that when foreigners, who heard God’s great name, came from a distant land to pray toward the temple, God would hear their prayers so that all the people of the earth might know God’s name and fear Him, and know that the temple was built for God’s namesake. So, in Jesus’ time, when the religious authorities made the temple a den of robbers, it disgraced the name of God, because the temple is associated with God’s name. Furthermore, when Jesus cleansed the temple, there was symbolic meaning. The temple pointed to Jesus himself because he is the true and final temple. Jesus is the reality of the temple for all nations coming to pray, since we pray in the name of Jesus to our Father. So, if we understand the temple from the Old Testament, we can see the significance of Jesus cleansing the temple and its relationship to the coming of the Kingdom of God. 
> 
> —	Dr. Peter Chow, translation


> What seems to be the thing that Jesus is most upset about is that the area of the temple, the court of the Gentiles, where they are having access to come and be in the presence of the Creator of the universe, the nations can come. They can’t go into the inner part of the temple which is only for the Jews, but the outer court is for the nations, is for the Gentiles. They can come and they can pray there. And what we see is that there is no place to pray. There’s no place for the Gentiles in terms of the real purpose of that space. And so, what we see is Jesus is restoring the temple, and restoring the function of that space by clearing out that space for the nations to be able to come and pray. 
> 
> —	Dr. Gregory R. Perry

As we read in Luke 19:47–21:38, Jesus spent the next several days teaching in the temple courts, speaking about the kingdom of God. During this time, his conflict with the Jewish leaders intensified, as he continued to condemn their practices and as they continued to challenge his authority. Listen to what the teachers of the law and the chief priests did in Luke 20:20:

> They sent spies, who pretended to be honest. They hoped to catch Jesus in something he said so that they might hand him over to the power and authority of the governor (Luke 20:20).

But Jesus didn’t stop preaching the truth just because evil men were trying to trap him. Instead, he openly rebuked them. As he told the crowds in Luke 20:46-47:

Beware of the teachers of the law. They like to walk around in flowing robes and love to be greeted in the marketplaces and have the most important seats in the synagogues and the places of honor at banquets. They devour widow’s houses and for a show make lengthy prayers. Such men will be punished most severely (Luke 20:46-47).

As Jesus neared Jerusalem, Israel’s refusal to accept him as their saving Messiah led him to prophesy the city’s destruction. But even this catastrophe would be only a foretaste of greater judgment. On the last day, when Jesus returns in glory, everyone will give an account before him. And for this reason, Jesus calls his disciples in every age to obey him diligently, and to watch carefully for his return.
	After reporting Jesus’ ministry in Jerusalem, we find the last major section of Luke’s gospel: the narrative of Jesus’ crucifixion and resurrection outside Jerusalem in Luke 22:1–24:53.