#### Resurrection and Ascension

In 24:1-12 Luke reported the discovery of Jesus’ empty tomb, the angelic messenger, and the bewildered disbelief of his disciples. Jesus had risen from the dead, just as he had foretold. He had conquered death for himself, and for all those who have faith in him.
	Luke 24:13-35 picks up the story later that same day, when Jesus joined two disciples on the road to Emmaus. He taught them to read the Old Testament in light of his own ministry and resurrection. Everything the Bible had ever recorded pointed to Jesus and his saving mission.
	Then, in Luke 24:36-49, Jesus appeared to his disciples and encouraged them to testify to these events. He told them to continue his mission by preaching the good news of repentance and forgiveness to all nations. Then Luke set the stage for his second volume, the book of Acts, by reporting Jesus’ promise to send the Holy Spirit to empower them for this task.
	Luke concluded his gospel in 24:50-53 with Jesus’ bodily ascension into heaven. In response to this miracle, the disciples worshipped, rejoiced, and praised God. The good news of great joy that the angel had announced in Luke 2:10 had finally come to God’s people. Jesus the risen, victorious Lord was their Savior.
	Luke wrote to assure Gentile believers that they had made the right choice in following Jesus. Through the structure and content of his gospel, Luke demonstrated that every aspect of Jesus’ life was part of God’s plan to establish his kingdom. He was the son of God and the son of David who came to fulfill Isaiah’s prophecies of salvation. Jesus was an unstoppable force of grace and mercy, who would bring all nations under his rule. He really had inaugurated the kingdom of God. He really was offering salvation to all families of the human race. And he really would save everyone that was faithful to him.
	Having considered the background and the structure and content of Luke’s gospel, we’re now ready to address our last main topic. In this section of our lesson, we’ll explore some of the major themes that Luke emphasized.
