## MAJOR THEMES

In general, we can say that all three of the Synoptic Gospels — Matthew, Mark, and Luke — share the same central theme: Jesus is the Christ who brings the kingdom of God. But each of these gospels deals with this central concept in different ways. So, as we explore this idea in Luke’s gospel, we’ll focus on Luke’s description of the kingdom of God as salvation.
	Luke used the words save, saving, salvation, and savior at least 25 times — more often than any of the other gospel writers. He stressed our desperate condition without Christ, and our need to be rescued. And he taught that the kingdom of God is our greatest salvation.	
The term salvation is deeply rooted in the messianic hopes of the Old Testament. We can define it as deliverance from the tyranny of evil, and from God’s judgment against sin. Throughout the Old Testament, and especially in the prophets, God taught his people that a messiah would eventually bring salvation from the effects of sin, and even from its presence. 
	In line with Luke’s emphasis on salvation, we’ll divide our discussion of the major themes of Luke’s gospel into three parts that correspond to different aspects of Christ’s saving work. First, we’ll consider Luke’s description of personal salvation. Second, we’ll consider his portrayal of God as our Savior. And third, we’ll survey the types of people that are saved. Let’s begin with Luke’s description of salvation.


### DESCRIPTION OF SALVATION

Throughout his gospel, Luke showed that personal salvation is primarily a matter of reversing people’s conditions. It changes their persons and standing before God, and alters their fate so that they’re blessed instead of cursed. 
	We are all born as sinners. And as a result, we’re condemned by God and heading toward everlasting destruction. But the gospel offers us forgiveness of sins, so that God no longer has a reason to condemn us. As Luke often put it, salvation results in peace between us and God. And with our newly favored status, we receive everlasting blessings in God’s kingdom, which we’ll inherit when Jesus returns and perfects the earth. In that new earth, there will be no more sickness or death or disability or pain. And no matter what our lives are like right now, we’ll be wealthy and privileged in the world to come.

> Readers of the Gospel of Luke often note that Jesus pays particular attention to groups that lack influence: women, Gentiles, children, for that matter, in the social context of Jesus’ life and ministry. There is, I think, a profound theological reason for this, and it stems from the fact that Luke understands God’s end-time rule in terms of advantaging the powerless. And, corollary that, disadvantaging the powerful, the reversal of roles actually. Now, in fact of course, this reversal of roles is not unique to the gospels or to the New Testament or to the notion of end-time or eschatological, you know, “kingdom of heaven is at hand” sort of reality. You find it all the way through biblical revelation. The book of Genesis, of course, repeatedly we note that second-born sons, for example, tend to be chosen over against first-born sons. This is a reversal of expectations. That’s just one example of the reversal of expectations that you have in the Old Testament which, as far as Luke is concerned, I think, comes to culmination, to a climax, to fulfillment in the great celebrated reversal of expectations that we have in the New Testament, especially, as I say, a reversal of the powerful and the powerless. 
> 
> —	Dr. David R. Bauer

You’ll recall that in Luke 7, John the Baptist sent messengers to ask Jesus if he really was the Messiah. And Jesus replied by paraphrasing Isaiah 61:1-2 — the same passage he had read in the synagogue at the start of his public ministry. Listen once more to Jesus’ reply in Luke 7:22:

> The blind receive sight, the lame walk, those who have leprosy are cured, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and the good news is preached to the poor (Luke 7:22).

Everything Jesus mentioned here was a form of salvation, a reversal from bad conditions to good conditions.
	In the new earth, these bad conditions will be completely eliminated. And even now, salvation gives us a foretaste of those everlasting blessings. But the great reversals of salvation aren’t limited to our outward circumstances. They also change us on the inside. As Jesus said in Luke 6:27-36:

> Love your enemies, do good to those who hate you, bless those who curse you, pray for those who mistreat you… Love your enemies, do good to them, and lend to them without expecting to get anything back. Then your reward will be great, and you will be sons of the Most High, because he is kind to the ungrateful and wicked. Be merciful, just as your Father is merciful (Luke 6:27-36).

The blessings of the kingdom don’t just reverse external circumstances. They also reverse the character and perspectives of those who are saved. As with external reversals, these internal reversals are manifested partially in the present world, and fully in the next world. Right now, we begin to think and act differently because we are indwelt by the Holy Spirit, and we see the world through new eyes. These changes will continue in heaven, where we’ll be totally free from the presence, corruption and consequences of sin. And they will be completed when Jesus returns and gives us our new bodies in the new earth.
	These blessings of salvation explain why time after time in Luke’s gospel the proper response to salvation is joy. One way that we see this is through the many songs Luke included, such as Zechariah’s song in Luke 1:68-79, Mary’s song in Luke 1:46-55, and Simeon’s song in Luke 2:29-32. Joy in salvation is also mentioned in angelic announcements, such as the message given to Zechariah in Luke 1:14, and the good news of great joy delivered to the shepherds in Luke 2:10-11. And joy is the consistent theme of Jesus’ parables of the lost sheep, the lost coin and the lost son in Luke 15. Jesus summarized the response of joy in this way in Luke 6:21-23:

> Blessed are you who weep now, for you will laugh… Rejoice in that day and leap for joy (Luke 6:21-23).

God intends salvation to give us joy. He wants us to rejoice because our sins have been wiped away — and because we have a peaceful relationship with him — and because we are inheriting the blessings of his kingdom. This theme was so important to Luke that he even closed his gospel with it. Listen to Luke 24:52-53, where he reported what the disciples did after Jesus ascended into heaven:

> They … returned to Jerusalem with great joy. And they stayed continually at the temple, praising God (Luke 24:52-53).


> When we see God for who he is, when we taste and see that the Lord is good, it should lead to joy, it should lead to delight. If I brought my wife flowers and I said to her, “here’s some flowers, honey, because I’m supposed to give these to you,” well, that won’t be quite what she’s after. It needs to be done with delight and joy because I adore her. And so, our delight in God becomes a fundamental expression of knowing God as he really is. And so, delighting in God, joy in God, a sense of being satisfied in him is at the very core of the Christian life. 
> 
> —	Dr. K. Erik Thoennes

With this description of salvation in mind, let’s turn to our second major them: Luke’s emphasis on God as our Savior.
