### GOD AS SAVIOR
	
We’ll consider God as our Savior in three steps. We’ll see that salvation comes by God’s power, according to God’s plan, and through God’s Son. Let’s look first at the fact that salvation comes by God’s power.


God’s Power
	
 The Gospel of Luke regularly echoes the Old Testament idea that God is the Savior of his people. For example, this is a dominant theme in Luke’s opening chapters, which set the tone for the entire book. Mary rejoiced because God was her Savior in Luke 1:47. Zechariah sang of the salvation God is bringing in Luke 1:68-79. And listen to what Simeon said when he held the baby Jesus in Luke 2:29-30:

> Sovereign Lord, as you have promised, you now dismiss your servant in peace. For my eyes have seen your salvation (Luke 2:29-30).

Simeon referred to God as the Sovereign Lord — or despota in Greek — ascribing to God power and authority over all creation. And with the term “your salvation,” Simeon indicated that God is using his power to bring salvation.
	And this same theme continues throughout the rest of Luke’s gospel. For example, John the Baptist proclaimed God’s salvation in the context of his powerful renewal of the entire earth in Luke 3:6. And in Luke 18:26-27, Jesus taught that salvation is impossible with men, but that everything is possible with God.
	Luke wanted his readers to understand that God is in control of everything. And therefore, salvation can’t be accomplished by a human being’s strength, intelligence, determination, or wealth. Salvation belongs to God. It’s his work, accomplished by his power. Only God has the authority to release people from his judgment. Only God has the power to change people on the inside. Only God has the might required to bring his kingdom to earth. And only God has the ability to reward his people with the blessings of that kingdom. 
	Besides emphasizing that salvation results from God’s power, Luke taught that salvation is part of God’s plan.


#### God’s Plan

For example, when Jesus began his public ministry in Luke 4, he read from Isaiah 61:1-2. And he astonished the crowd by claiming that he was fulfilling that prophecy at that very time and place. And throughout the rest of his gospel, Luke continued to demonstrate that salvation is God’s plan by showing that the dramatic events of Jesus life fulfilled God’s promises in the Old Testament. Listen to Jesus’ words near the end his public ministry in Luke 24:44:

> Everything must be fulfilled that is written about me in the Law of Moses, the Prophets, and the Psalms (Luke 24:44).

The entire Old Testament talks about the salvation that God is accomplishing through Jesus. It has always been God’s plan to save his people in this way.
	Another way Luke showed that salvation fulfills God’s plan was by regularly pointing out that the things Jesus did were necessary because God had required or even appointed them to happen. As just one example, listen to the way Jesus described his suffering and death in Luke 9:22:

> The Son of Man must suffer many things and be rejected by the elders, chief priests and teachers of the law, and he must be killed and on the third day be raised to life (Luke 9:22).

Notice that when Jesus explained what was going to happen, he used the word “must,” which translates the Greek word dei, meaning “it is necessary.” Why was it necessary? Because God required it. Everything that happened to Jesus was part of God’s ancient plan to save his people.
	The third point we’ll mention to demonstrate that God is our Savior is that salvation comes through God’s Son Jesus Christ.


#### God’s Son

Luke’s gospel repeatedly affirms that Jesus is the Son of God. Sometimes Jesus’ sonship identifies him as God incarnate, as in the angelic announcement of his birth in Luke 1:32-35. At other times, it emphasizes his authority. We see this at his baptism in Luke 3:22, where God spoke his approval from heaven, and during his transfiguration in Luke 9:35, when God instructed people to listen to his Son. Still at other times it refers to his role as God’s messianic vassal king, as during the Last Supper in Luke 22:29. 
But all these references to Jesus as God’s Son share at least one thing in common: they all indicate that Jesus is the one through whom God is accomplishing salvation. Jesus is God’s Son that was sent into the world in order to rescue his people from condemnation by dying in their place, and by bringing God’s kingdom to earth.
Sometimes Christians wrongly think that the Father is an angry God that hates us, and that Jesus is his rebel Son that came to stand up for us. But nothing could be further from the truth. Jesus only came to save us because his Father sent him. Yes, Jesus really is our Savior. And he really does save us from the Father’s judgment. But it’s critical to understand that the salvation he brings originates with the Father. As God’s Son, Jesus only does what the Father commands. He uses God’s power in order to fulfill God’s plan. And in this way, Jesus’ saving work is proof that God the Father is our ultimate Savior.
Now that we’ve looked at Luke’s description of salvation and at God as our Savior, let’s turn to a third major theme in Luke’s gospel: the variety of people that are saved.
