### PEOPLE THAT ARE SAVED

In Jesus’ day, no one would have been surprised if he had offered salvation to those that held places of honor or power within society. No one would have wondered why he saved the ones who strictly conformed to the letter of God’s law. And no one would have marveled if he had condemned the people that Jewish society already despised, people that God had apparently passed over for blessing, because of some failing on their part. But that’s not what Jesus did. And one of the major themes of Luke’s gospel is to call attention to the surprising people that Jesus did save, and to the surprising honor and status he gave them. 

> One of the things that is notable about Luke’s narrative is that he is interested in the least, the last, and the lost and in fact one of his major themes is the theme of reversal. The least, the last, and the lost are going to become the first, the most, and the found in the kingdom of God. Luke is really interested in, if you will, the ethical side of the gospel. He’s interested in what was distinctive about the ministry of Jesus that would be seen as commendable or virtuous and so one of the things that we certainly do see in both Luke and Acts which is a two-volume work, Luke/Acts, is a concern for the poor, and for women and for the diseased and for the elderly. There’s no question that there’s more emphasis in Luke/Acts than in the other gospels about these kinds of things. I mean, so much so that when we deal with the beatitudes of Jesus, instead of Matthew’s, “blessed are the poor in spirit” in Luke it’s simply “blessed are the poor.” And this is a real concern of Luke. He is concerned about this because he believes that not only does redemption come through Jesus, but also justice. A rectifying of the wrongs of society, of the fallenness of humanity is brought about by Jesus and he really wants to emphasize that Jesus is the Savior of the world. He’s, if you will, the Savior for everybody. It’s one stop shopping in Jesus, whether you’re one of the most or the most elite persons or well-educated persons or the most well-known persons in society, or the very least of the least, Jesus is for everyone and Luke certainly wants to emphasize that. 
> 
> —	Dr. Ben Witherington III

For our purposes in this lesson, we’ll limit ourselves to looking at just four surprising types of people to whom Luke frequently called attention, beginning with the Gentiles.
	The Old Testament speaks of Gentiles eventually being brought into God’s kingdom and receiving its salvation and blessings. But the Jews in Israel’s day typically looked down on Gentiles as being excluded from the primary blessings of God’s kingdom. 
	By the time Luke wrote his gospel, the Christian church throughout the world consisted largely of Gentile converts. Through history, God had clearly demonstrated his intention to bless the Gentiles in astounding ways. And as we saw earlier in this lesson, one of Luke’s reasons for writing was to assure the Gentiles that they hadn’t made a mistake by becoming Christians. So, throughout his gospel, he called attention to those places where salvation had been extended to the Gentiles, in fulfillment of the hopes and ideals of the Old Testament.
	For example, in Luke 2:10-14, the angels announced that the joy of the gospel would be for “all the people” and for “men on earth.” Rather than saying that Israel’s new king had been born to save the Jews, the angels spoke in much more global terms. And in Luke 2:32, Simeon proclaimed that the baby Jesus would be “a light for revelation to the Gentiles.” And while all four gospels quote Isaiah 40 in the story of John the Baptist, only Luke 3:6 extended the quotation to include the words “all mankind will see God’s salvation.”
	Luke also noted that the Samaritans, whom the Jews counted as their enemies, could also be saved. For instance, in Luke 17:11-19, Jesus healed ten lepers, but the only leper to return and thank him was a Samaritan. And only Luke recorded the parable of the Good Samaritan, found in Luke 10:30-37, in which the Samaritan was an example of neighborly love. 
	Beyond this, Luke recorded times when Gentiles demonstrated real faith in Jesus as the Savior. For example, in Luke 7:9, Jesus said of a Roman centurion:

> I have not found such great faith even in Israel (Luke 7:9).

And as we saw earlier in this lesson, Luke traced Jesus’ genealogy all the way back to Adam, implying that Jesus came to save Adam’s entire race, including both Jews and Gentiles. 
The second surprising type of people that received salvation in Luke’s gospel was sinners. Now, in an important sense, all human beings are sinners. But there were some people in Jesus’ day whose sins were so great and so public that these people were essentially ostracized by Jewish society, like the immoral woman in Luke 7:36-50, and Zacchaeus the tax collector in Luke 19:1-9. Tax collectors were sinners because they made their living by charging their countrymen exorbitant tax rates that were not required by the government. But Jesus came to save even them. He was eager to grant salvation to anyone who repented in faith. As just one example, listen to this story from Luke 5:29-32:

> Then Levi held a great banquet for Jesus at his house, and a large crowd of tax collectors and others were eating with them. But the Pharisees and the teachers of the law who belonged to their sect complained to his disciples, "Why do you eat and drink with tax collectors and 'sinners'?" Jesus answered them, "It is not the healthy who need a doctor, but the sick. I have not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance" (Luke 5:29-32).

The third surprising group of people that are saved in Luke’s gospel is women. In the ancient Eastern Mediterranean world where Jesus lived, women didn’t have many rights in society, and they weren’t highly valued. But Luke gave attention to the way that Jesus brought salvation to them. In Luke 8:41-53, Jesus healed Jairus’ daughter and the woman who had been hemorrhaging for twelve years. He also showed great compassion toward widows, who in the ancient patriarchal society had no help and virtually no hope. Luke 7:11-17 and 18:1-8 illustrate Jesus’ concern and care for these most needy people.
	One of Luke’s most dramatic teaching techniques that highlighted the salvation of women was contrasting humble women with proud male religious leaders. For instance, in Luke 13:14-15, Jesus called the ruler of the synagogue a hypocrite, while in the very next verse he called a crippled woman “a daughter of Abraham.” We find a similar contrast in Luke 7:37-50, where Jesus accepted the adoration of an immoral woman while condemning the proud Pharisee Simon.
	And for his ultimate example of what it means to love God, Luke related the story of Jesus’ friend Mary. In Luke 10:27, Jesus taught that the two great commandments were to love God and to love our neighbor. Then, in verses 38-42, Mary exemplified how to love God, specifically, by listening obediently to his teachings. Not Peter, not John, and certainly not the Jewish leadership, but a woman was the model of godly piety.
	Finally, the fourth surprising type of people that are saved in Luke’s gospel is the poor. Luke began his gospel by pointing out that the family of Mary and Joseph was poor. We know this because in Luke 2:24, the offering they brought to the temple was the offering of the poor prescribed in Leviticus 12:8.
	Luke also showed that Jesus favored the poor in places like the parable of the rich fool in Luke 12:13-21, and in his story about the rich man and Lazarus in Luke 16:19-31. And listen once again to Luke 4:18, where Jesus read from Isaiah 61:1:

> The Spirit of the Lord is on me, because he has anointed me to preach good news to the poor (Luke 4:18).

Luke was the only gospel writer to report this event. And he included it as a model for Jesus’ entire ministry. His point was that part of bringing the kingdom of God is proclaiming the good news of salvation to the poor. Luke took special care to point out that the God of the universe had become incarnate to save even those that society despised. Gentiles, sinners, women, and the poor had very few rights in Jewish society and weren’t expected to inherit the greatest blessings of God’s kingdom. But Jesus rejected that value system. He offered full acceptance and endless blessings to everyone that received him as Savior and Lord.

> Of all the gospel writers Luke has a particular emphasis on marginal groups in Palestinian society of his day. We see him constantly pairing up accounts of men with accounts with women. We see him also paying particular attention to the Samaritans, paying attention to the poor. We see this parable for example that’s indicative of Luke’s gospel, only found in Luke’s gospel, about Lazarus and the rich man. And we see again, a parable only in Luke, the Good Samaritan parable. And so, these accounts of Jesus’ teaching fit very well with his programmatic sermon in Nazareth. It says that, I have come, today the Scripture is fulfilled; the Spirit is upon me to declare good news to the poor and to the captives, to the oppressed. And Jesus tells his disciples that when they’re going to have a banquet they should invite the lame and the poor as well. And so, Jesus is illustrating something very important, that in our relationship with other people who bear God’s image, we aren’t to sort of think of ourselves better than we ought, is the way Paul put it. But we should see that Jesus reached out in grace to every aspect of society. He called his disciples to do that. And we are to do that as well. Jesus is ridiculed for spending time with the prostitutes and the sinners and the way that he responds is that, I have come, not for the righteous, but for the sinners. And so, it’s not only a reflection of Jesus’ mission to reach every aspect of the people of God, of his society of that day, but it’s also a sense of who we really are, of our real need as well. That we all need the grace of God, that we cannot merit God’s favor on our own good works or our own station in society, and therefore we’re all on equal ground before God and should be gracious to one another and reach out to each other because we have the same sort of need. 
> 
> —	Dr. Gregory R. Perry
