## CONCLUSION

In this lesson, we’ve explored the Gospel of Luke by considering its background in terms of its author and original audience, and the occasion of its writing; its structure and content; and its major themes that revolve around the topic of salvation. If we keep these ideas in mind as we read Luke’s gospel, we’ll have a better understanding of his meaning, and be more prepared to apply it to our lives in the church and in the world.
	The Gospel of Luke presents Jesus as the glorious Son of God who came to earth as the loving Savior of the world. He extends the good news of God’s salvation to everyone, regardless of ethnicity, wealth or status. In his own day, Luke’s gospel assured Gentile Christians that they hadn’t made a mistake by following a Jewish Messiah. And the same is true in every age. Since the first century, the vast majority of the church has been Gentile. And we haven’t made a mistake either. And as followers of Christ, it’s our responsibility to keep preaching that same good news of repentance and faith to everyone in the world, knowing that we have the only message that can bring real salvation. 

## CONTRIBUTORS

Dr. Pete Alwinson (Host) is the Executive Director of FORGE: City Wide Ministry to Men with Man in the Mirror. He is also the founding pastor of Willow Creek Presbyterian Church (PCA) in Winter Springs, FL, where he served as Senior Pastor for 26 years. Dr. Alwinson received his M.Div. from Trinity Evangelical Divinity School and his D.Min. from Reformed Theological Seminary. He is an Adjunct Professor at Reformed Theological Seminary, a Board Member of Key Life Network, and the author of Like Father, Like Son: How Knowing God as Father Changes Men. 


Dr. Richard Bauckham is a New Testament scholar and author and is Professor Emeritus at the University of St. Andrews in Scotland.

Dr. David R. Bauer is Dean of the School of Biblical Interpretation and the Ralph Waldo Beeson Professor of Inductive Biblical Studies at Asbury Theological Seminary.

Dr. Peter Chow was President of China Evangelical Seminary in Taiwan (retired), and now serves part-time as a pastor at Trinity Christian Church of Greater Philadelphia.

Rev. Michael J. Glodo is Associate Professor of Pastoral Theology at Reformed Theological Seminary in Orlando, Florida.

Dr. Steve Harper is the founding Vice President of the Florida Dunnam campus of Asbury Theological Seminary in Orlando, FL., and retired Professor of Spiritual Formation and Wesley Studies.

Dr. Gregory R. Perry is Vice President for Strategic Projects at Third Millennium Ministries and President of Thirdmill Seminary. He served previously as Associate Professor of New Testament and the Director of City Ministry Initiative at Covenant Theological Seminary.

Dr. David A. Redelings is Professor of New Testament at Bethel Seminary.

Dr. Mark L. Strauss is Professor of New Testament at Bethel Seminary, San Diego.

Dr. Frank Thielman is the Presbyterian Professor of Divinity in New Testament at Beeson Divinity School.

Dr. K. Erik Thoennes is Professor of Biblical and Theological Studies at Biola University’s Talbot School of Theology and is Chair of the Biblical and Theological Studies Theology Department.

Dr. Peter Walker has served as Professor of Biblical Studies at Trinity School for Ministry and as Associate Vice-Principal at Wycliffe Hall, Oxford. He is currently an instructor with Jerusalem Center for Biblical Studies.

Dr. Stephen J. Wellum is Professor of Christian Theology at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.

Dr. Ben Witherington III is Amos Professor of New Testament for Doctoral Studies at Asbury Theological Seminary.
 
## GLOSSARY
 
 
Abraham – Old Testament patriarch, son of Terah, father of the nation of Israel with whom God made a covenant in Genesis 15 and 17 promising innumerable descendants and a special land

Anti-Marcionite Prologues – Ancient prologues to the Gospels (ca. A.D. 160-180) that assign authorship and give biographical details for the gospel writers

Clement of Alexandria – (ca. A.D. 150-215) Early church father and writer from Alexandria

covenant – A binding legal agreement made between two people or groups of people, or between God and a person or group of people

crucifixion – a form of the death penalty used in the ancient Roman Empire in which criminals were tied or nailed to a cross and then hung there until they died, typically by suffocation; the means by which Jesus died

David – Second Old Testament king of Israel who received the promise that his descendant would sit on the throne and reign forever

dei – Greek word (transliteration) meaning "it is necessary"

despota – Greek word (transliteration) meaning “master” or “lord"; “one who possesses supreme authority”
 
Gabriel – Angel who brought insight and understanding to Daniel's visions in the book of Daniel and who announced the births of John the Baptist and Jesus in Luke's gospel 

Gentile – Non-Jewish person

Irenaeus – (ca. A.D. 130-202) Second-century bishop and early Christian writer who wrote Against Heresies in which he refuted Gnosticism and affirmed the validity of the four gospels

Isaiah – Prophet from Judah who ministered from approximately 740-701 B.C. during the reigns of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah

John – Son of Zebedee and brother of James; one of the twelve Apostles; author of the Gospel of John; 1, 2, 3 John; and the book of Revelation; sometimes called "the disciple Jesus loved"

John the Baptist – New Testament prophet who called for true repentance and proclaimed that the arrival of God's kingdom was near; identified Jesus as the Messiah and prepared the way for Jesus’ public ministry

kingdom of God – God’s sovereign and unchanging rule over all of creation

kratiste/kratistos – Greek word (transliteration) meaning "most excellent," a person of highest honor, sometimes used for Roman governors; used by Luke in his gospel and the book of Acts when referring to Theophilus 

Levi – The apostle Matthew's other name; tax collector who became an apostle; also, a tribe of Israel that served as priests

Luke – Author of the third gospel and the book of Acts; a Gentile convert to Christianity and one of Paul's co-workers; believed to have been a physician

Magnificat – Mary’s song of praise to God expressing her great joy at the salvation that was coming through her child, Jesus

Mark – Also known as John Mark; author of the Gospel of Mark and cousin of Barnabas; accompanied Paul and Barnabas on their first missionary journey

Matthew – One of the twelve Apostles and author of the Gospel of Matthew; a tax collector when Jesus called him; also known as Levi

Messiah – Hebrew word meaning "anointed one"; the great King from David’s royal line who would bring about the transition from this age to the age to come; translated "Christos" in Greek

Moses – Old Testament prophet and deliverer who led the Israelites out of Egypt; man with whom God made a national "covenant of law" and who administered the Ten Commandments and the Book of the Covenant to the Israelites; also appeared with Elijah at Jesus' transfiguration

Muratorian Fragment – Earliest known document listing the New Testament books that the church considered canonical, dated A.D. 170-180

Nero – Roman emperor from A.D. 54-68 who persecuted Christians; blamed the Christians for a fire in Rome in A.D. 64; executed Paul (according to tradition) 

paleography – The study of ancient handwriting and the dating and deciphering of historical manuscripts

Papyrus 75 – Early manuscript containing portions of Luke and John, probably copied between A.D. 175 and A.D. 200

parable – A short allegorical story used to teach a moral or spiritual lesson

Passover – Jewish festival remembering when God delivered Israel out of slavery in Egypt

Peter – One of Jesus' twelve apostles; also called Simon; a leader in the early Christian church; preached on the Day of Pentecost in Acts 2; according to church historians, Mark relied on Peter's accounts of Christ's life to write his gospel

Pharisees – Jewish religious sect from the first century known for their strict observance of the Law; believed in the future resurrection, but also believed that God would not intervene until Israel became obedient to the Law

prophet – God’s emissary who proclaims and applies God’s word, especially to warn of judgment against sin and to encourage loyal service to God that leads to blessings

Samaritans – People of Samaria whose pagan ancestors had intermarried with Israelites living in the northern kingdom; practiced a syncretistic form of the Jewish religion; considered by the Jews to be unclean and despicable

Simeon – In the New Testament, a righteous and devout man who was shown by the Holy Spirit that he would not die until he had seen the Messiah; proclaimed that the baby Jesus was the Messiah in Luke chapter 2

Son of David – Messianic title that referred to David’s long-awaited, righteous descendant who would save God’s people; frequently applied to Jesus in the New Testament (especially in Matthew)

Son of Man – A messianic title found in Old Testament prophecy; used in the New Testament to refer to Jesus

synoptic – Term meaning "seen together"; used when referring to the gospels of Matthew, Mark and Luke because of their similarities

Tertullian – (ca. A.D. 155-230) Early Christian writer and church father from Carthage who wrote Against Marcion and popularized the Latin terminology used to discuss the Trinity

Theophilus – Person to whom Luke addressed both his gospel and the book of Acts

Transfiguration – Event recorded in Matthew 17:1-8, Mark 9:2-8, and Luke 9:28-36 when Jesus was revealed to his disciples in glory

Zacchaeus – A chief tax collector in Jericho who was short in stature; after being called by Jesus, he vowed to give half his riches to the poor and restore fourfold the money he had misappropriated 



