## BACKGROUND 
	
We'll explore the background of Mark’s gospel by considering the author Mark himself, his original audience, and the occasion or circumstances of his writing. Let’s look first at the author of Mark’s gospel.


### AUTHOR

We’ll look at the authorship of Mark’s gospel in two parts. First, we’ll look at the traditional view of its authorship. And second, we’ll explore the author’s personal history. Let’s start with the traditional view on this gospel’s authorship.


#### Traditional View 

> Early church tradition is unanimous that the Gospel of Mark was written by John Mark.  When we look in the New Testament, John Mark is described as a cousin of Barnabas.  He accompanied Paul and Barnabas on the first missionary journey in the book of Acts.  His mother is described as having a home in Jerusalem in which the early disciples met.  Peter mentions John Mark as his son in one of his letters. Papias says that John Mark followed Peter around in Rome and accurately wrote down his teaching. 
> 
> —	Dr. Robert L. Plummer

Among the earliest Christian writers that said Mark wrote the second gospel was Papias. Papias lived at the beginning of the second century, and was a bishop in Asia Minor around A.D. 130. 
	We know of Papias’ view from the famous church historian Eusebius, who wrote around A.D. 325. In his work Ecclesiastical History, book 3, chapter 39, section 15, Eusebius offered this quote from Papias:
 
> Mark, having become the interpreter of Peter, wrote down accurately, though not in order, whatsoever he remembered of the things said or done by Christ. For he neither heard the Lord nor followed him, but afterward, as I said, he followed Peter, who adapted his teaching to the needs of his hearers.

According to Papias, Mark’s gospel was heavily dependent on the teaching of the Apostle Peter. Mark had not been an eyewitness to the ministry of Jesus, but he recorded what Peter had seen and heard from Jesus. 

> I think that the very earliest church traditions we have are sufficiently close to the time of the writing of the gospels and the early circulation of the gospels for people to have had some good information. And much the best example of this is what we know from Papias, who was Bishop of Hierapolis in Asia Minor the beginning of the second century. Papias wrote a big book which, sadly, has not survived, and we only have some little fragments of what he wrote, but among these are some comments on the gospels. And notably, Papias tells us that Mark wrote his gospel depending on the preaching of Peter. He was Peter’s interpreter according to Papias, which presumably means that he translated Peter’s Aramaic into Greek or Latin. And Papias tells us that he composed the gospel out of his knowledge of Peter’s preaching. I think that’s probably the most authentic and early tradition we have about the Gospels, and really, I see no reason to question it. 
> 
> —	Dr. Richard Bauckham

Other writers in the early church also affirmed the traditional view that Mark wrote this gospel. For example, the Anti-Marcionite Prologue to the second gospel, written around A.D. 170, directly asserts Mark’s authorship. The church father Irenaeus, who wrote around A.D. 177, also affirmed this view. And in addition to this, the earliest Greek manuscripts that give a title to this book call it “According to Mark.”
	The evidence affirming that Mark wrote the second gospel was widespread in the early church. In fact, we have no record from the ancient church of any significant debate over his authorship. Although in recent centuries some scholars have tried to deny this traditional view, they have not refuted the ancient testimony to Mark’s authorship, nor have they been able to point to anything in the gospel itself that rules out Mark as its author. For these reasons, modern Christians can confidently affirm that Mark wrote this gospel.
	Now that we’ve confirmed the traditional view that Mark wrote this gospel, let’s explore his personal history so that we can better understand his account.


#### Personal History 

According to Acts 12:12, Mark was the son of a woman named Mary who lived in Jerusalem. It was in her home that some of the Christians in Jerusalem met to pray for Peter while he was in prison. So, Mark’s association with Peter and other apostles began at least this early. 
	Mark was also the cousin of Barnabas, as Paul mentioned in Colossians 4:10. He even assisted Paul and Barnabas on their first missionary journey. But as we learn in Acts 13:13, Mark deserted them in the middle of the trip and he returned to Jerusalem. 
	As a result, Paul refused to allow Mark to join him on his second missionary journey. As we read in Acts 15:36-41, Paul and Barnabas separated over the issue. So, Barnabas took Mark with him to minister in Cyprus, while Paul chose Silas to replace Barnabas as his traveling companion.
	According to Colossians 4:10, however, Mark later won back Paul’s confidence, and was even with Paul during one of his imprisonments. 
	 Later, Mark also assisted Peter when he ministered in Rome. In fact, he had such a close relationship with Peter that Peter affectionately called Mark, “my son” in 1 Peter 5:13. It was probably during this time that Peter taught Mark most of the details of Jesus’ earthly ministry that are recorded in Mark’s gospel.

> Mark or John Mark, as his full name is, is a fascinating character in the Bible. He shows up just briefly at a few instances. His mother was named Mary. His mother owned a house in Jerusalem, we know, because the church at times met at that house. He was the cousin of Barnabas, who was one of the missionary companions of the apostle Paul. He traveled with Paul and Barnabas on their first missionary journey. Church history tells us he was a close associate with Peter, as well. In fact, church tradition tells us that Mark, in fact, his gospel was really, sort of, the recollections of Peter. So some people say, “Well, who is this Mark? He wasn’t an apostle.” Certainly true that he wasn’t an apostle, but just look at his credentials; quite amazing credentials. He almost certainly saw and knew Jesus maybe as a very young youth at the time. So, he was an eye-witness to Jesus, almost certainly an eye-witness to the resurrection. Who were his mentors? His two main mentors were Paul the apostle to the Gentiles, and Peter, really the representative of the twelve apostles. So, qualified to write a gospel of Jesus Christ? Absolutely qualified. 
> 
> —	Dr. Mark L. Strauss

Now that we’ve talked about Mark as the author of this gospel, we should explore the identity of Mark’s original audience. 
