###  ORIGINAL AUDIENCE

The witness of the ancient church and several details of Mark’s gospel point to the churches in Italy, especially in the city of Rome, as Mark’s original audience.	
	We’ll explore the idea that Mark wrote to the churches of Italy and Rome by looking briefly at the witness of the early church and at some details of Mark’s gospel itself. Let’s turn first to the witness of the early church.


#### Witness of Early Church

The three ancient witnesses we mentioned earlier — Papias (who wrote around A.D. 130), the Anti-Marcionite Prologue (written around A.D. 170), and Irenaeus (who wrote around A.D. 177) — all reported that Mark wrote his gospel in Italy, and some specifically identified the city of Rome. Moreover, none of them suggested that Mark had sent his gospel to the church in any other city. This indicates that Mark wrote to the local churches where he lived. And this conclusion is strengthened by 1 Peter 5:13 which locates Mark in Rome during the days he ministered alongside Peter.
	Of course, like all the Gospels, history proves that God intended the Gospel of Mark to be used by the whole church in all ages. But we are better prepared to interpret Mark’s gospel the way he intended when we understand that he wrote out of a deep concern for what was happening to the Italian, and especially, Roman Christians of his day. 
	In addition to the witness of the early church, many details of Mark’s gospel also suggest that he wrote to churches in Italy, and more particularly in Rome. We’ll mention four details of Mark’s gospel that support the claim that he wrote to the churches of Italy and Rome.


#### Details of Gospel

First, on a number of occasions, Mark explained Palestinian customs to his audience. For example, Mark explained the Pharisees’ practice of washing their hands in Mark 7:3-4. Explanations like this suggest that Mark’s audience included a substantial number of Gentiles who lived outside Palestine. 
	A second detail that is compatible with an Italian and Roman audience is that Mark explained Aramaic expressions. For example, listen to his explanation of the names given to James and John in Mark 3:17:

> James son of Zebedee and his brother John (to them he gave the name Boanerges, which means Sons of Thunder) (Mark 3:17).

Mark provided similar explanations in 5:41, 7:34, and 15:22, 34. Aramaic speaking Palestinians would not have needed these explanations, and even many Jews outside Palestine would have been familiar with Aramaic and Hebrew from their synagogues. So, this detail suggests that Mark wrote to Gentiles outside Palestine.
	A third detail that points even more clearly to an audience in Italy and Rome is that Mark used more Latin words than any other gospel writer, indicating that a substantial part of his audience understood Latin. 
	During the first century, Latin was not widely spoken in the Mediterranean world. It was primarily limited to Italy, the homeland of the Roman Empire. So, it’s significant that Mark used Latin words at least 15 times. For example, in Mark 12:42, he used the Latin word lepta, referring to a small copper coin. Although he spelled the word in Greek letters, the word itself was Latin and was not likely to have been understood by those who didn’t speak Latin. 
	A fourth detail that shows the plausibility that Mark wrote to the churches of Italy and especially Rome is that Mark mentioned a man named Rufus. 
	In Mark 15:21, we’re told that the man who carried Jesus’ cross to Golgotha was the father of Rufus and Alexander — two men that play no role in Mark’s gospel. So why did Mark mention them? One of the best explanations is that they were known to, or even part of, Mark’s audience. And in fact, a man named Rufus is mentioned as a member of the Roman church in Romans 16:13. Assuming he is the same Rufus mentioned by Mark, the implication is that Mark wrote to the church in Rome.
	None of these details individually proves that Rome was the destination of Mark’s gospel. But their cumulative effect confirms the strong witness of the ancient church. And as we’ll see later in this lesson, reading the gospel with a Roman audience in mind can help us draw out some of Mark’s particular emphases, and apply them to our own lives in the modern church.
	With the author and original audience of this gospel in mind, we’re ready to examine a third aspect of the background of Mark’s gospel: the occasion or circumstances of its composition.


#### OCCASION

We'll explore two aspects of the occasion for Mark’s gospel. First, we’ll consider the date when Mark wrote. And second, we will explore Mark’s purpose for writing. Let’s begin by looking at the date of Mark’s gospel.

#### Date 

The date of the composition of Mark’s gospel can’t be determined with absolute certainty. But overall, the evidence seems to point to a date in the mid- to late-60’s of the first century.
	Ancient witnesses such as Irenaeus and the Anti-Marcionite Prologue to Mark claim that Mark wrote his gospel after the death of Peter. Peter was most likely martyred in Rome during the persecutions inflicted on the church by the Roman emperor Nero, following the burning of Rome in A.D. 64. Papias may imply that Mark began his work while Peter was still alive, but he does not rule out the possibility that Peter died before Mark finished. So, it seems reasonable to accept that the earliest date Mark would have completed his gospel would have been sometime around Peter’s death in A.D. 64. 
	The latest year Mark could have written is harder to determine. As we saw in an earlier lesson, many scholars believe that Mark was the first gospel written, and that Matthew and Luke both used Mark as a reference when they wrote their own gospels. Since none of these three gospels mentions the destruction of Jerusalem and its temple, which took place in A.D. 70, many scholars conclude that Matthew, Mark and Luke were all written before that time. And if Matthew and Luke received and utilized Mark’s gospel before completing their own works, it’s safe to say that Mark was completed even sooner than A.D. 70 — certainly by A.D. 69, and probably as early as A.D. 67, which would provide more time for Matthew and Luke to have become familiar with Mark’s gospel before writing their own. 
	With the date of Mark’s gospel in mind, let’s consider his purpose for writing.


#### Purpose

In one sense, Mark and all the other gospels shared one common purpose: to preserve a true historical record of Jesus’ life and teachings. From A.D. 50 onward more and more of the apostles and eyewitnesses of Jesus’ life, death, and resurrection were dying. So, there was an increasing need to preserve their testimony and witness. As Eusebius and other early church writers mentioned, part of Mark’s purpose was to preserve Peter’s record of Jesus’ ministry.
But preserving this record was not Mark’s only purpose. As with every gospel writer, Mark didn’t just want his readers to learn about Jesus. He also wanted them to draw lessons from the life of Jesus that they could apply to their own lives. But what were their lives like?

> The 60’s A.D. in Rome was a really tough time for Christians. You’ve got to remember that up until that time, in Roman law, if you were Jewish you were part of a recognized religion; it was known as the religio licita, a permitted religion. And so there’s not much persecution coming to Jewish Christians because the Romans are thinking, “Well, they’re just part of Judaism.” But what happens when the Roman authorities begin to sense, “Ah, this new religion seems to be including Gentiles, non-Jews, and is rather different to Judaism?” Suddenly it’s no longer a safe or permitted religion, and the Roman authorities might get rather uptight about that. Now, that’s precisely what’s beginning to happen, or being recognized, in Rome in the early 60’s A.D. The year 59, Nero goes slightly mad, and the first five years of his reign are rather good, but from then on until he dies in 68, he’s becoming more and more unpredictable. Then you’ve got Paul arriving in Rome in about A.D. 60, and he’s willing to die for Christ and willing to show that this newfound religion is for everybody, including the emperor Nero. And it’s possible that as Nero encounters this, he begins to realize, here is a religion which I don’t like. I’m meant to be in charge, and here are these Christians proclaiming, “Jesus is Lord.” So, when there’s a great fire in Rome on July the 18th, A.D. 64, and Nero gets the blame, if you like; he then passes the blame on to this new group, this new sect called the Christians, and it’s tragic what we hear of that. 
> 
> —	Dr. Peter Walker

During the years that Mark was probably writing, the church in Rome was suffering persecution under the Roman Emperor Nero. Nero ruled from A.D. 54 to 68. He is notorious for blaming the Christians for setting fire to Rome in A.D. 64, and for punishing them in horrible ways.

> Under the rule of Nero, Rome persecuted the church severely. Initially, Rome was constituted as a republic. Later, after the assassination of Julius Caesar, Augustus led his army, and occupied the City of Rome and dissolved the Senate.  So, the Roman Republic became the Roman Empire, and Augustus became its first emperor. That marks the beginning of the history of Roman brutality. In fact, Nero wasn’t the worst in terms of persecuting Christians. Other emperors attacked Christianity even more fiercely, and many Christians suffered and were killed by being nailed to crosses or burned to death, according to historical records. There were many martyrs in the early church that by their deaths bore witness to the mercy and righteousness of God. 
> 
> —	Dr. Stephen Chan  

Life was difficult in many ways for the Christians in and near Rome during this period. And as we’ll see, Mark designed his gospel to minister to their circumstances. While there are many ways to describe Mark’s purpose for writing, in this lesson we’ll focus on the idea that Mark wrote his gospel to strengthen the persecuted Christians of Rome. 
	Mark’s gospel made it clear that whatever difficulties and temptations the Roman Christians faced as they suffered for Christ, they could be sure that Jesus had already faced them. He had been unjustly condemned in a Roman court. He had been beaten by Roman soldiers. And he had been crucified on a Roman cross. But through his suffering, Jesus had been victorious. And Mark wanted to assure his audience that if they followed Jesus faithfully, they would be conquerors too. Yes, they would suffer. But their suffering would be their path to glory, just as it had been for Jesus. 
	Now that we’ve looked at the background of Mark’s gospel, let’s turn to its structure and content.
