## STRUCTURE AND CONTENT

On a large scale, Mark’s gospel divides into five main sections. First, Mark opened his gospel with a relatively brief announcement of Jesus as the Messiah in 1:1-13. Second, there is a large section of narrative describing the power of the Messiah in 1:14–8:26. Third, a short, pivotal centerpiece presents the apostles’ affirmation of the Messiah in 8:27-30. Fourth, another large section of narrative deals with the suffering of the Messiah in 8:31–15:47. And fifth, there is a short conclusion that records the victory of the Messiah in 16:1 8. We’ll look at each of these portions of Mark in some depth, beginning with the announcement of the Messiah. 


### THE ANNOUNCEMENT OF THE MESSIAH

Listen to how the gospel opens in Mark 1:1:

> The beginning of the gospel about Jesus Christ, the Son of God (Mark 1:1).

When Mark referred to Jesus as “Christ,” he used the Greek translation of the Hebrew word Messiah. Similarly, the term Son of God was another indication that Jesus was God’s Messiah.
	In the Old Testament and in contemporary Jewish theology, the Messiah was to be the descendant of King David who would restore the royal throne to Israel and turn the nation into God’s kingdom on earth. 
	This opening declaration is followed by a brief account of Jesus’ baptism by John the Baptist in Mark 1:2-11. At the end of Jesus’ baptism, the Holy Spirit descended on Jesus, and God the Father’s voice was heard from heaven announcing that Jesus was his beloved Son. In this way, both the Spirit and the Father confirmed that Jesus was indeed the long-awaited Messiah. 

> It is very interesting to think of what the Jews of Jesus’ day thought in terms of the coming of the Messiah. And actually, there were a lot of diverse beliefs out there. We have some documents from the Dead Sea Scrolls that show that some believed in two messiahs coming, a priestly messiah and a kingly messiah. But the mainstream expectation was that the Messiah would be a son of David and that he would bring in political peace, that he would drive out the Romans. I think the religious establishment believed that the kingdom would come in if Israel would obey the law. They actually viewed Jesus as a threat in that regard, because Jesus didn’t seem to be advancing obedience to the law but transgression of it, at least in their view. So he didn’t have the political machinery that they expected, and then in terms of the law, he didn’t do what they expected as well, and so they were, I think, scandalized by him. Actually, I think at the end of the day, they viewed Jesus in terms of Deuteronomy 13, a person who did signs and wonders and miracles but was actually a false prophet and therefore that he should be put to death. 
> 
> —	Dr. Thomas R. Schreiner

But Jesus was not the kind of Messiah many people expected. In general, first-century Jews thought the Messiah would march into Israel and take over the government. But in Mark 1:12-13, we learn that immediately after Jesus’ baptism, the Holy Spirit sent him into the desert to be tempted by Satan. He would ultimately triumph. But according to God’s plan, his path to victory would follow a long road of trouble. 
	Following the announcement of Jesus as the Messiah, Mark described the power of the messiah in Mark 1:14–8:26.


### THE POWER OF THE MESSIAH

In this section of Mark’s narrative, Jesus began to demonstrate his power and authority as the Messiah. Many crowds gathered to see and benefit from this ministry, but they didn’t recognize that Jesus’ power proved he was the Christ. In fact, nowhere in this entire section did anyone refer to him as the Christ. Even Jesus remained silent about his own identity, and he encouraged others to remain quiet, too. 
	Of course, the first readers in Mark’s Roman audience were Christians, so they already knew that Jesus was the Messiah. But Mark’s strategy in this portion of the narrative allowed them to feel the tension of the crowds around Jesus, who must have wondered who this man of power really was, and what he had come to do. 
	Unfortunately, critical scholars have often taken Jesus’ silence as an indication that Jesus was not self-conscious of his messianic role during his early ministry. But as we’ve seen in Mark 1:11, God himself announced Jesus’ role as Messiah at his baptism. In this light, it’s much better to understand Jesus’ silence as strategic. Jesus had a particular goal to fulfill, and he knew that the more people flocked to him, the more that goal would be hindered.  
	Mark’s narrative describing the power of the Messiah can be divided into four parts. First, Mark provided an introduction that set the tone for the entire narrative. Second, he focused on Jesus’ localized ministry near the city of Capernaum. Third, he explained that Jesus’ ministry expanded to the rest of the region of Galilee. And fourth, he reported that Jesus eventually moved beyond Galilee, even into predominantly Gentile areas. We’ll look at each of these three sections, beginning with the introduction in Mark 1:14-15.


#### Introduction

Listen to the way Mark summarized Jesus’ preaching in Mark 1:15: 

> "The time has come," [Jesus] said. "The kingdom of God is near. Repent and believe the good news!" (Mark 1:15).

Mark indicated that Jesus’ central purpose in Galilee was to preach the gospel or good news that the kingdom of God was near, and that its blessings were offered to all those who would repent and believe. 
	Throughout his record of the power of the Messiah, Mark focused on Jesus’ ministry in and around the region of Galilee, beginning near the city of Capernaum, and spreading out from there. By comparing Mark’s account with the other gospels, it appears that Mark omitted times when Jesus ministered in other places. These omissions indicated that Mark’s goal was to report Jesus’ activities and strategy in the region of Galilee, rather than to provide a detailed report of all his travels.
 	After the introduction, Mark described Jesus’ ministry near the city of Capernaum in the region of Galilee in Mark 1:16–3:6.
