#### Near Capernaum

Mark began by reporting that Jesus called his first disciples in Mark 1:16-20. In this section, we see that one way people responded to Jesus was in radical obedience. Jesus told them to follow him, so they dropped what they were doing and became his disciples.
	Next, Jesus proclaimed the gospel by teaching and working miracles in Capernaum in Mark 1:21-34. 
	During this time Jesus’ fame began to spread throughout Galilee, as it would continue to do so throughout his ministry. Because of his growing fame, crowds began to gather around Jesus, often hindering his ability to proclaim and demonstrate the gospel. So, he began to instruct others not to promote him as Messiah.
Jesus then left Capernaum and began teaching and performing miracles in neighboring villages, as we see in Mark 1:35-45. Jesus moved to neighboring villages partly to spread his gospel through his teaching and miracles. But he also did it to escape the crowds in Capernaum that were preventing him from ministering freely. As he had done previously, he encouraged those he met not to spread reports about him. 
Next, Mark reported that Jesus returned to Capernaum, where he clashed with Jewish leaders, as we read in Mark 2:1–3:6. 
This part of Mark’s gospel deals with things like Jesus’ authority to forgive sin, his justification for ministering to sinners, and his teachings about the Sabbath. But it also introduces another consequence of his growing fame: Jesus’ detractors began to grow in number, and to oppose him more strongly. In fact, the section ends by foreshadowing Jesus’ death. In Mark 3:6, Mark reported that Jesus’ opponents were so angry that many of them began plotting to murder him. 

> Jesus was not accepted because of his preaching and because of his miracles. When we read the New Testament, we think why wouldn’t people accept him? Why wouldn’t they see his power? Why wouldn’t they hear his teaching? But the teaching of Christ... several things caused people to reject it. One was that his content was not what they wanted. They were expecting a kingdom on this earth. He was speaking about a kingdom that would come into the heart and transform people’s lives, the rule and reign of God in people’s hearts. It was also because his teaching struck to the heart. And of course, his miracles were deeply hated because the enemies of Christ who disagreed with his teaching knew that his miracles in some way verified what he was saying. And so, the fallen heart does not naturally or readily accept the teaching of God, and Christ’s ministry is the glaring example of that, because here is God among men, and yet men reject him. 
> 
> —	Dr. Jeff Lowman

> 
> We often come to God with our agendas.  We have our expectations of what he should be like, and how he should work. And when he defies our agendas, our expectations, often we don’t have much tolerance for that.  And so, people will hate Jesus when he comes preaching a Kingdom that doesn’t fit their ideal Kingdom. He comes as a Messiah that doesn’t fit their preconceived expectations of what the Messiah should be like. And so, he unsettles their expectations. And we don’t like that. Sometimes Jesus was hated because he came with a very different plan than the religious leaders had. He came preaching a Kingdom that was going to remove the kind of power and prominence and authority, prestige they had in their religious roles and they didn’t want anything to do with that. And so, any time we come to God with our agenda, we’re setting ourselves up to be in opposition to God rather than coming to him with humble hearts, teachable hearts, trusting him in whatever he brings our way. 
> 
> —	Dr. K. Erik Thoennes

Now that we’ve surveyed Jesus’ work near Capernaum, let’s see how he expanded his ministry throughout the region of Galilee in Mark 3:7–6:13.


#### Region of Galilee

At this stage, Jesus preached and demonstrated the nearness of God’s kingdom in new areas, moving beyond Capernaum to the rest of the surrounding region. As he preached repentance and faith in these areas, he continued to attract crowds, and to inspire strong opposition. 
	This section begins with Jesus’ withdrawal from the crowds in Mark 3:7-12. This paragraph sets the tone for the entire section by emphasizing that Jesus’ fame was spreading everywhere, despite his attempts to minimize it. And the resulting crowds that gathered around him made it difficult for him to minister. This difficulty appears to be one reason that Jesus extended his ministry to other areas of Galilee.
	The next section of this narrative reports Jesus’ appointment of twelve of his followers to be his special disciples, as we read in Mark 3:13-19. Jesus chose these twelve disciples to help him preach the gospel and perform miracles. But Mark also reminded his readers that one of these disciples would eventually betray Jesus. Opposition to Jesus would come not just from his enemies, but even from his closest followers.
	After this, Mark reported the opposition Jesus faced from teachers of the law and from his own family, as we see in Mark 3:20-35. This narrative demonstrates that as Jesus proclaimed the gospel of the kingdom with miraculous power, he faced opposition from all sides. Rather than receiving him as the Messiah, the teachers of the law believed he was possessed by the devil, and his own family believed he had lost his mind.
Following this, Jesus proclaimed the gospel through parables about the kingdom of God in Mark 4:1-34. Jesus commonly taught in parables when he was surrounded by unbelievers. He did this in order to reveal God’s kingdom to those who believed, and to hide it from those who did not. As he told his disciples in Mark 4:11-12:

> The secret of the kingdom of God has been given to you. But to those on the outside everything is said in parables so that, “they may be ever seeing but never perceiving, and ever hearing but never understanding; otherwise they might turn and be forgiven!” (Mark 4:11-12).

Sadly, sometimes Jesus’ parables also confused his disciples. But when this happened, Jesus explained his meaning in private to make sure they understood.
	The main point of the parables in this section of Mark’s narrative is that God would bring in the fullness of his kingdom only after a long process of slow growth through the spread of the gospel. Jesus was bringing God’s kingdom to earth. But he was doing it in a prolonged way that would often require his followers to face suffering and opposition, just as he had.
	Mark’s account of Jesus’ parables is followed by several displays of power in Mark 4:35–5:43. Here, Mark reported that Jesus controlled the weather, cast out demons, healed disease, and raised the dead. In each of these stories, the people were terrified in the face of danger. But after Jesus miraculously rescued them, their terror actually increased, because they didn’t understand who this man of power really was.

> The disciples, Jesus’ followers, express fear in the gospel sometimes when they see Jesus doing dramatic things, when he is working amazing miracles. They express fear when God is at work. For example, in Mark 4, the disciples are in the midst of a great storm on the sea. The waves are washing into the boat and it looks like the boat is about to be sunk, and Jesus is asleep on the cushion. So, they wake Jesus up, hoping apparently that he’ll help them bail out the boat, and they say, “Master, do you not care that we’re drowning?” And Jesus gets up and he tells the wind and the waves to be quiet. And so, they’re saved, and they had been very afraid of the storm, but now Mark tells us, they were filled with great fear. Well, so why are they afraid? The storm’s no longer there; the waters are calm. They’re afraid because they know that the only person that can still the wind and the waves is the person who created the wind and the waves, God himself. And they realized that they are in the boat with God himself who has just stilled the wind and the waves. That creates fear in them because I don’t think they quite yet know what kind of God this is. They’ve been sort of thrown for a loop, and they don’t know the character of Jesus. 
> 
> —	Dr. Frank Thielman

Following these displays of power, Mark wrote about the opposition Jesus faced in his hometown of Nazareth in Mark 6:1-6. This narrative reemphasizes that many people strongly opposed Jesus at this stage in his ministry. Even as his gospel spread with power, and the crowds following him increased, the people of his own hometown rejected him and his gospel. 
	Finally, the account of Jesus’ ministry in the region of Galilee concludes with the sending of the twelve disciples in Mark 6:7-13. Jesus sent his 12 disciples to preach the gospel of the kingdom and to perform miracles throughout the land of Palestine. But Jesus also made it clear that as the disciples spread the gospel of repentance and faith, people would respond to them in the same way they had responded to him. Some people would accept them, but others would reject them. Jesus consistently taught that the kingdom of God continues to grow despite its opposition. 
	After reporting Jesus’ gospel ministry near the city of Capernaum and the surrounding region of Galilee, Mark turned his attention to the power of the Messiah in Jesus’ ministry beyond Galilee in Mark 6:14–8:26.

