#### Beyond Galilee

In recording Jesus’ work beyond the region of Galilee, Mark continued to emphasize some of the themes we’ve already seen. He reported the powerful spread of the proclamation of the kingdom, and the reaction of enthusiastic crowds, and the increasing number of Jesus’ opponents. 
	But Mark also began to focus on the disciples in new ways. He emphasized the ways Jesus trained them for the difficult days ahead. And he called attention to the ways they regularly misunderstood his teaching and failed in their commitments to him. 
	Mark’s report of Jesus’ ministry beyond Galilee begins with an emphasis on Jesus’ growing fame in Mark 6:14-29.
	In the past, when Jesus had limited his ministry to the area around Capernaum, his fame had spread throughout the entire region of Galilee. And now his fame continued to precede him. As Jesus remained on the outskirts of Galilee, his fame was spreading throughout Palestine and even reached King Herod. Mark also used this opportunity to address a question about Jesus’ identity. Specifically, Mark explained that Jesus could not be John the Baptist, since King Herod had put John to death. 
	Next, Mark reported several miracles in Mark 6:30-56. This section begins with Jesus attempting to withdraw from the crowds, but then it describes several works of power that demonstrate why the crowds had gathered in the first place. Jesus displayed his power by feeding crowds of 5,000 people and 4,000 people, by walking on water in the Sea of Galilee, and by healing the blind and the deaf. His miracles demonstrated his undeniable control over all creation. And because of these powerful miracles, the crowds followed Jesus wherever he went. Sometimes they even preceded him.
	Following Jesus’ miracles, Mark reported the continuing opposition from the Pharisees in Mark 7:1-23. Jesus and the Pharisees clashed over the proper way to observe the Old Testament Law, the value of traditions, and the nature of holiness. And as a result, the tension between Jesus and the influential Jewish parties increased.
	Lastly, Mark reported another set of miracles in Mark 7:24–8:26. This section begins and ends with statements about Jesus trying to avoid and even to prevent crowds. And between these statements, it reports that Jesus performed many miracles among both Jews and Gentiles. And it even records that some Gentiles had faith in him. 
	In the midst of this list of miracles, Mark drew special attention to the shortcomings of Jesus’ disciples. Earlier in his ministry, the disciples had failed to understand the parable of the sower, as we see in Mark 4:13. And at this point, they still weren’t able to understand some of his teachings. So, Jesus confronted them directly. Listen to Mark’s record in Mark 8:14-17:

> The disciples had forgotten to bring bread, except for one loaf they had with them in the boat. "Be careful," Jesus warned them. "Watch out for the yeast of the Pharisees and that of Herod." They discussed this with one another and said, "It is because we have no bread." Aware of their discussion, Jesus asked them: "Why are you talking about having no bread? Do you still not see or understand?” (Mark 8:14-17).

Jesus was talking about spiritual corruption, but his disciples thought he was talking about bread for their stomachs. It’s easy to see why Jesus would have been frustrated with them.
	Throughout Mark’s report of Jesus’ power as the Messiah, Jesus’ miracles and teaching confirmed that he really was the Christ. So, why did so many people oppose him? Why did they reject him? Why did even his disciples have such difficulty understanding and following him? It was largely because Jesus was not the kind of Messiah people anticipated. Instead of rising to political supremacy as they had expected, he was using his power to preach the gospel and minister to the needs of others. 

> The evidence from the first century suggests that the Jews were looking for, especially, a political and military Messiah who would establish God’s kingdom, who would expel the Romans, defeat the Romans, and establish God’s kingdom in Jerusalem as the center.  So it was very nationalistic in that sense. Jesus didn’t show signs that he was going to fulfill that nationalistic sense; instead he had a much larger vision, really. It wasn’t about the Romans; it was really about creation itself. Creation was in a fallen state, and Jesus came to reverse the fall, to establish — once again to establish — God’s kingdom on earth. And that kingdom meant the defeat of sin, the defeat of Satan, the defeat of death. So, Jesus was looking at something much greater than merely a political victory, merely a military victory. 
> 
> —	Dr. Mark L. Strauss


> Jewish people have been expecting for some five or six hundred years someone to restore the Kingdom to Israel. They haven’t had a King; they haven’t had their own independence. So, there is a lot of tension in first century Palestine, that when Jesus comes proclaiming the kingdom and hinting that he is the Messiah, they are really on tender hooks to hear what he is saying. What were they expecting? Well, they were expecting someone perhaps who was going to restore the temple; there were doubts about whether the temple was really — now it had been rebuilt by pagan king Herod the Great — whether that was really the temple that God intended. But more than that, they were longing for God to redeem Israel, to fulfill his promises that he had made in the Old Testament. Where is God going to fulfill his promises? So that’s what they were particularly looking for, but by that they probably meant, well here we are, under Roman occupation, surely if God is going to fulfill his promises, he’s going to get rid of the Romans. And probably they were expecting political independence. What we have in the New Testament, then, is Jesus claiming that he is the Messiah, that he is the one who’s going to restore the temple — that actually he is going to be the true temple — and also, he is going to be the one who’s going to bring in the Kingdom, but actually it’s not going to be a politically independent Jewish kingdom. Actually, it’s going to be the news that Jesus Christ the King is Lord over the whole world. So, it’s slightly different than what they expect, but it’s a deeper fulfillment of what was promised. 
> 
> —	Dr. Peter Walker

Mark’s original readers probably experienced the same tension the twelve disciples felt over the kind of Messiah Jesus was. The church in Rome had been planted at a time when Christianity was well received. And like much of the early church, they had probably expected Jesus to return relatively quickly to consummate his kingdom on earth. But instead, the passing years brought horrible suffering and persecution under Nero. So, Mark made it clear that Jesus would always be the powerful Messiah, even though he doesn’t always do the things his followers expect. And because he’s the powerful Messiah, believers can trust that when the time is right, he will victoriously consummate his kingdom just as he promised. But in the meantime, he is still the Lord, and he can sustain us through whatever troubles we face.
	After Mark’s long narrative describing the power of the Messiah, we come to the third main section of his gospel: a short episode that records the apostles’ affirmation of the Messiah in 8:27-30. 
