### THE APOSTLES’ AFFIRMATION OF THE MESSIAH

This is the famous scene on the way to Caesarea Philippi in which Jesus drew out of his disciples the confession that he was the Christ. And almost every Markan scholar agrees that it forms the centerpiece of Mark’s gospel.
	In the first verse of the gospel, Mark wrote, “The beginning of the gospel about Jesus Christ, the Son of God.” Jesus was the “Christ,” the Messiah. But since that verse, the word “Christ” had not appeared anywhere in Mark’s gospel. Mark had not spoken of Jesus as the Christ. He had not reported that the disciples had called him the Christ, or that the people who witnessed him had speculated that he was the Christ, or even that the demons had used the term Christ.
	In fact, nearly everyone who had tried to identify Jesus had been wrong. They thought he was a mere miracle worker, or a prophet, or John the Baptist, or a lunatic, or a demoniac possessed by Beelzebub. But at this moment, Jesus decided it was time to press his disciples to acknowledge who he really was. Listen to their dialogue in Mark 8:27-29: 

> [Jesus] asked them, “Who do people say I am?” They replied, “Some say John the Baptist; others say Elijah; and still others, one of the prophets.” “But what about you?” he asked. “Who do you say I am?” Peter answered, “You are the Christ” (Mark 8:27-29).

After 8 chapters of evidence, the apostles finally affirmed their belief that Jesus was the Christ, the Messiah, the one who was bringing the kingdom of God.
	After the apostles’ affirmation of the Messiah, the fourth major section of Mark’s gospel deals with the suffering of the Messiah. This section extends from 8:31–15:47.
	In the first half of his gospel, Mark had focused on how Jesus’ powerful ministry led up to the glorious affirmation that he is the Christ. But at this point, Mark began to emphasize a different aspect of Jesus’ messianic work: his suffering and death in Jerusalem.
	
### THE SUFFERING MESSIAH

Mark’s record of the suffering of the Messiah divides into three main sections: Jesus’ preparation of his disciples for his suffering and death, his confrontation with the Jewish leaders in Jerusalem that provoked his suffering and death, and finally his experience of suffering and death. We’ll explore each of these sections, beginning with his preparation in Mark 8:31–10:52.
	

#### Preparation

 The material describing Jesus’ preparation of his disciples can be divided into three main parts, each of which begins with him predicting his suffering, death and resurrection. The first section focuses on Jesus as Lord of the Kingdom in Mark 8:31–9:29. 
	Mark began with a report of Jesus’ unexpected strategy for bringing God’s glorious kingdom to earth — namely Jesus’ suffering, death and resurrection — which Mark explained in 8:31–9:1. Throughout his teachings in this section, Jesus talked about his own suffering, and warned his disciples that they would also have to suffer as they continued his gospel ministry. 
	After this, Mark called attention to Jesus’ unique authority by reporting an event commonly known as the Transfiguration in Mark 9:2-13. In this event, Jesus’ glory was revealed visibly to Peter, James and John. Moses and Elijah also appeared with Jesus, indicating that Jesus affirmed and continued in the teachings of the Law and the Prophets of the Old Testament. But God commanded the disciples to honor and obey Jesus above even Moses and Elijah. This event prepared Jesus’ disciples by reminding them to remain loyal to Jesus above all others and by encouraging them that loyalty to Jesus was the purest form of loyalty to God and his Old Testament revelation.
	Finally, Mark focused on Jesus’ unique power by revealing his ability to control demons in Mark 9:14-29. Jesus’ disciples could not exorcise a particularly difficult demon, and Jesus taught that such demons could only be exorcised through prayer. But Jesus himself was able to cast out the demon with a simple command. In this way, he demonstrated his superiority over all others, and ensured his disciples that he had unlimited power to bring his will to pass. Regardless of the doubts and fears they were to experience when he was killed, his power should have encouraged them to stand fast in their faith in him.
	The second part of Mark’s account of Jesus’ preparation for his suffering, death and resurrection deals with the values of the kingdom of God, and is found in Mark 9:30 10:31.
	Like each section of Mark’s account of Jesus’ preparation for Jerusalem, this one begins with Jesus predicting his suffering, death and resurrection. This helps us see that Mark was still emphasizing the disciples’ preparation for those events. After this prediction, Jesus continued to prepare his disciples by explaining that God does not judge things the same way human beings do. So, no matter what they suffered, and no matter what strange things happened, they weren’t to judge matters in the way the world does. Rather, they were to be assured that God was using these events to bring in his kingdom and to glorify Jesus. 
	After Jesus’ prediction in Mark 9:30-31, Mark reported Jesus’ teachings on the values of the kingdom. In this section, Jesus demonstrated how worldly intuitions clash with God’s truth in five areas of life. First, Jesus talked about honor in Mark 9:32-42, pointing out that those who are most honored in the kingdom of God are the ones that are honored least in this life. 
	Second, Jesus talked about worth in Mark 9:43-50. Specifically, he instructed his followers to get rid of anything that hindered them from pursuing the goals of the kingdom of God, regardless of how valuable those things seemed to be in this life. 
	Third, Jesus talked about marriage in Mark 10:1-12. His point was that marriage and divorce should ultimately be reckoned according to God’s law rather than human law — even if human law seemed to be intuitively more fair. 
	Fourth, Jesus talked about children again in Mark 10:13-16. Despite what Jesus had said earlier, his disciples were still preventing children from approaching him. In response, Jesus reminded them that God had already given the kingdom to these children, so that by refusing the children the disciples were opposing God. 
	And fifth, Jesus talked about wealth in Mark 10:17-31. This is the well-known story of the rich young ruler, who was dismayed when Jesus told him that his attachment to money was hindering him from embracing the values of the kingdom of God.
	In each of these sections of teaching, Jesus explained the values of God’s kingdom so that his disciples would be better prepared to accept his suffering death, as well as the hardship they would have to endure as his followers. 
	The third part of Mark’s account in Jesus’ preparation for Jerusalem deals with leadership in the kingdom of God in Mark 10:32-52. After predicting his suffering, death and resurrection in Mark 10:32-34, Jesus addressed the question of leadership in the kingdom in three parts. First, he said that James and John would have to share in his suffering in Mark 10:35-40. They would drink of the same cup and undergo the same baptism. These metaphors implied that Jesus’ followers would have to share in his sufferings because of their service to him. 
	Second, Jesus described leadership in the kingdom as service in Mark 10:40-45. He had mentioned this idea twice before when talking about the values in the kingdom. But this was the first time he had explained the reason behind it: Christian leaders have to be servants because they follow the model of Christ, who himself acted as a servant by suffering and dying for sin. 
	Third, Jesus demonstrated the motivation for servant leadership by showing mercy to the blind man Bartimaeus. Servant leaders are not to make sacrifices just because they want a greater reward in the kingdom, but because they truly have compassion for those they serve.

> Jesus calls Christian leaders to be different, to be servants of their people.  In this wonderful passage, in Mark’s gospel 10:45, Jesus distinguishes the type of leadership that should be true of his followers from the surrounding Greco-Roman culture. The predominant paradigm of leadership in Mark’s day was the Roman demonstration of power and dominance over their people. And Jesus said, “[I] did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give [my] life as a ransom for many.” So, Jesus is asking, commanding his followers to follow his type of leadership, to lead as a servant, and not to follow the paradigm of Roman dominance that was so prevalent in Mark’s day. 
> 
> —	Dr. Gregory R. Perry

Jesus insisted that leadership in the kingdom of God can’t be modeled on the world’s pattern of leadership. Instead, it needs to follow his own example of suffering.
	In some ways, this must have been disheartening news to Mark’s readers in Rome. Instead of reassuring them that their suffering was abnormal and would soon pass, Mark’s gospel assured them that suffering was the standard for those who follow Christ. But at the same time, this news should have had an encouraging side. The suffering of the church is part of Christ’s plan for victory. As Paul wrote in Romans 8:18:

> Our present sufferings are not worth comparing with the glory that will be revealed in us (Romans 8:18).

After reporting Jesus’ preparation of his disciples, Mark turned to Jesus’ confrontation with the Jewish leaders in Mark 11:1–13:37.
