#### Confrontation

Mark’s record of confrontation divides into two main parts: First, narratives of opposition in 11:1–12:44. And second, the Olivet Discourse in 13:1-37. 
	Throughout this section of his gospel, Mark reported how Jesus forced the hand of the Jewish leaders. In earlier parts of Mark’s gospel, Jesus had not looked for conflict with the Jewish leaders; he had faced opposition primarily as people had objected to his ministry of mercy. But in this section, Mark reported that Jesus actively sought opposition, in order to move toward his crucifixion. 
	First, Jesus’ triumphal entry into Jerusalem in Mark 11:1-11 publicly declared him to be the Messiah and rightful King of Israel. 
	Next, his condemnation of Israel as a withered fig tree in Mark 11:12-14, 20-25, and his temple cleansing in verses 15-19, directly attacked the moral standing of the Jewish leaders and undermined their authority and influence over the people.
	Jesus also argued with the chief priests, teachers of the Law, and elders in Mark 11:27-12:12. After defeating their challenge to his authority, he told the parable of the vineyard tenants that accused the Jewish leadership of mutiny against God. At this point, they were ready to arrest him, but their fear of the crowds discouraged them.
	Next, Jesus argued with and refuted the Pharisees and the Herodians over Roman taxes in Mark 12:13-17.
	After this, in Mark 12:18-27, Jesus proved that the Sadducees had misunderstood what the Scriptures teach about resurrection.
	And finally, he attacked the teachers of the law in Mark 12:28-44. Although Jesus admitted that some of them knew the law, he insisted that as a whole they were controlled by greed and worldly ambition.
	In one way or another, Jesus forced a public confrontation with every party of influential Jews: the priests, the teachers of the law, the Pharisees, the Herodians, and the Sadducees. He gave every group a reason to hate him and to seek his death, in order to provoke them into killing him. 
	The second major section of Jesus’ confrontation with the Jewish leadership is a discourse between Jesus and his disciples. This discourse is commonly called the Olivet Discourse because it took place on the Mount of Olives. Broadly speaking, it spans Mark 13:1-37. In this section, Jesus warned his disciples of the hardship they would face in the future so that they would not be caught off guard. He taught them that they would be dragged before rulers to testify about him. They would be beaten. They would be hated. Their families would fall apart. They would suffer natural disasters and great tribulation. In fact, he made it clear that persecution and suffering would characterize the church until his return.
	But Jesus also gave his disciples great hope by assuring them of the final victory of the kingdom of God. For example, in Mark 13:26-27, he reminded them of the great victory that would be theirs when he consummated his kingdom in power and glory, as long as they remained faithful to him.
	Predictably, Jesus’ words to his disciples continued to incite the Jewish leaders against him. For example, in Mark 13:1-2, Jesus taught his disciples that the temple would be destroyed. But as we see in Mark 14:58, his words were overheard and misinterpreted, so that during his trial he was falsely charged with planning to destroy the temple himself. 
	Now that we’ve looked at Mark’s account of the suffering of the Messiah in terms of Jesus’ preparation of his disciples and confrontation with the Jewish leaders in Jerusalem, we’re ready to turn to Jesus’ experience of suffering and death in Mark 14:1–15:47.


#### Experience

The record of Jesus’ actual experience of suffering and death is filled with well-known events: the betrayal by Judas, the prediction of Peter’s denial, the failure of the disciples to watch and pray with Jesus in Gethsemane, Jesus’ arrest, the two trials and Peter’s denial, and finally Jesus’ crucifixion and burial.
These are dark, threatening chapters. The mood is foreboding. They are filled with failure: failure of the Jewish leaders, failure of the crowds, failure of the Jewish and Roman legal systems, and failure of the disciples. Writing to a persecuted Roman church, Mark made it clear that the Jerusalem birth pangs of Christianity had been as severe as any in Rome.
Mark’s record of Jesus’ experience of suffering and death can be divided into four main parts, beginning with his anointing for burial in Mark 14:1-11. In this section, Mark reported some very important details. First, he said that the chief priests and teachers of the law were looking for a way to arrest and kill Jesus. Second, a woman anointed Jesus with very expensive perfume, and he responded by saying that she had anointed him for burial. In this way, Jesus indicated that he would be killed in the immediate future. Third, Judas Iscariot began plotting to betray Jesus to the chief priests and teachers of the law. We might see this as the turning point in the story of Jesus’ suffering and death. His death was no longer a vague threat but an imminent reality.
Next, Mark reported Jesus’ last hours with his disciples in Mark 14:12-42. This part of Mark’s narrative begins with Jesus and his disciples preparing for and eating the Last Supper in Mark 14:12-31. It was during this meal that Jesus instituted the Christian ordinance of the Lord’s Supper. He also used this time to give his disciples some final preparations to help them through his suffering and death. For example, he warned them that they would all fall away from him, and he foretold Peter’s denials. 
	After the Last Supper, the group went to the Garden of Gethsemane, as we see in Mark 14:32-42. According to this passage, Jesus was deeply distressed and troubled, and overwhelmed with sorrow to the point of death. He was clearly suffering greatly in anticipation of his crucifixion. 
The third section of Mark’s report of Jesus’ experience of suffering and death is the account of Jesus’ arrest and trials in Mark 14:43–15:15. This section begins with Jesus’ betrayal by his disciple Judas Iscariot in Mark 14:43-52. It continues with his trial before the Jewish leadership in Mark 14:53-65. Next, we read the report of Peter’s denials that he knew and followed Jesus in Mark 14:66-72. And finally, we read about his trial before the Roman governor Pilate in Mark 15:1-15. At the end of these humiliating experiences, Jesus was flogged, and then handed over to the Roman soldiers to be crucified.
	The fourth part of Mark’s report of Jesus’ experience of suffering and death covers Jesus’ crucifixion in Mark 15:16-47. It begins with Jesus being handed over to the Roman soldiers to be beaten, humiliated, and put to death on a cross like a common criminal. From a human perspective, his suffering was overwhelming. 
The fact that Jesus suffered this mistreatment at the hands of the Romans would have connected these events strongly to Mark’s original audience of Roman Christians. They would have quickly seen the parallels between their Lord’s suffering and their own, and should have taken his courage as an inspiration for them to persevere through their own difficulties.
But the worst part of Jesus’ suffering was that the sin of the world was laid upon him, and he was subjected to the wrath of God the Father. Finally, after he was dead, he was laid in a tomb, his body unprepared for burial because there was no time left before the Sabbath. 
Now that we’ve looked at the announcement of the Messiah, the power of the Messiah, the apostles’ affirmation of the Messiah, and the suffering of the Messiah, we’re finally ready to turn to the victory of the Messiah in Mark 16:1-8, where Mark described our Lord’s resurrection.
