### THE VICTORY OF THE MESSIAH

Before we get into the content of this section, we should pause to explain why we say that the Gospel of Mark ends in 16:8. After all, most of our Bibles have twenty verses in this chapter. But most of these Bibles also have notes saying that verses 9-20 don’t appear in the most reliable ancient manuscripts of Mark’s gospel. 
	In the ancient Greek manuscripts of Mark, there are three different endings. One group of manuscripts ends at verse 8. The second group ends at verse 20. And the third group has a two-sentence ending after verse 8.
	A careful evaluation of all the evidence has led most scholars to conclude that Mark ended his gospel with verse 8. The most ancient and most important manuscript traditions favor the shortest ending as the original. 
	Many scholars believe that the other two endings seem to have been added because a scribe felt uncomfortable with the idea that Mark concluded the gospel with the sentence “They were afraid.” But this scribal discomfort was unfounded. In fact, the theme of fear, awe and amazement runs throughout this gospel. And for this reason, the emphasis on fear is a very appropriate way to end this particular gospel. In fact, it also fits well with the experiences of Mark’s original audience. As they faced persecution after the resurrection of Jesus, they were surely comforted to know that the earliest disciples of Jesus had also experienced fear. 
	Let’s turn now to the account of Jesus’ resurrection in Mark 16:1-8. Mark’s resurrection account is shorter than the same account in the other gospels, but this brevity is completely in character with the outline of this gospel. As you’ll recall, the announcement of the Messiah that opened the gospel was also very short, and so was the apostles’ affirmation of the Messiah that forms the gospel’s centerpiece. 
	This section on the victory of the Messiah begins with the women who came to Jesus’ tomb to anoint his body on the third day after his death and burial. They were met by an angelic visitor whose message was clear and direct. Jesus had conquered death and risen in victory, just as he had predicted so many times throughout his ministry. Listen to the end of the gospel in Mark 16:6-8:

“Don’t be alarmed,” [the angel] said… “He has risen! He is not here. See the place where they laid him...” Trembling and bewildered, the women went out and fled from the tomb. They said nothing to anyone, because they were afraid (Mark 16:6-8).

The women’s response is completely predictable in the context of Mark’s narrative: they were afraid. Nearly everyone in this gospel responded to God’s powerful presence in awe, amazement, and fear.

> It’s a Markan understatement. Here that the women have been commanded to go and announce his resurrection and instead they are fearful and they run away and say nothing to no one.  And yet, here we are two thousand years later reading this and we know that’s not the end of the story; we know that God’s truth triumphed, and so this is again a foil that we repeatedly see in Scripture of human failure being contrasted with the faithfulness and the purposes of God. 
> 
> —	Dr. Robert L. Plummer

God’s people will experience weakness and need in this life. This was true for Mark’s original audience in Rome, and it has continued to be true for the church throughout the ages. But the good news of the gospel is that the kingdom of God has come. The Messiah has conquered the enemies of God’s people — even the final enemy, death itself. And for this reason, the people of God can boldly face the enemies of the gospel of the kingdom. The victory is already ours.
	Having considered the background and the structure and content of Mark’s gospel, we’re ready to look at some of its major themes.



## MAJOR THEMES

The identity of Jesus as the Messiah or Christ is undoubtedly the most critical theme Mark communicated in his gospel. Mark wanted to make sure that his readers knew that Jesus had truly come to save them from their sins. Jesus was the king who had conquered death. He was powerful, fearsome, unstoppable, and glorious. He was the redeemer who had come to rescue them by bringing the kingdom of God to earth. And despite the fact that they couldn’t see him anymore, he was still in control, and he had promised to return to finish the salvation he had started.
For our purposes in this lesson, we’ll divide the theme of Jesus’ messiahship into two parts. First, we’ll consider Jesus as the messianic suffering servant. And second, we’ll look at his identity as the messianic conquering King. Let’s begin with Jesus’ role as the suffering servant.


### SUFFERING SERVANT

Our discussion of Jesus as the suffering servant will divide into three parts. First, we’ll mention some Jewish expectations regarding the Messiah. Second, we’ll briefly highlight the nature of Jesus’ ministry as the suffering servant. And third, we’ll talk about the proper response Mark wanted his readers to have to this aspect of Jesus’ messiahship. Let’s look first at the Jewish expectations for the Messiah that were common in Jesus’ day.	

#### Jewish Expectations

For hundreds of years before the time of Christ, the vast majority of Israelites lived outside the Promised Land. And those who remained in the Land suffered under the tyranny of Gentile rulers. At first it was the Babylonians, then the Medes and the Persians, then the Greeks, and finally the Romans. And this long history of suffering led Jewish theologians to emphasize the Old Testament prophecies that God would eventually send a messianic liberator to restore Israel’s kingdom.
	Jewish messianic hopes took many different forms. For example, the zealots believed that God wanted Israel to usher in the day of the Messiah by rebelling against the Roman authorities. Different apocalyptic groups believed that God would supernaturally intervene to destroy his enemies and restore the people. There were also nomists, like the Pharisees, who believed that God would not intervene until Israel became obedient to the Law. So, in Jesus’ day, there were many people who longed and waited for their Messiah to come. 
	He came as a humble, suffering servant. Jewish messianic hopes looked for an immediate earthly political kingdom under the rule of Messiah similar to the kingdom that David had ruled centuries before. But Jesus didn’t even try to establish this kind of kingdom during his earthly ministry. And this caused many people to reject him as the Messiah.
	Interestingly, the idea of the Messiah as a suffering servant wasn’t new. The Old Testament prophet Isaiah had indicated this role for the Messiah, especially in Isaiah 53, which the New Testament frequently applies to Jesus. We can even say that if Jesus had not suffered and served, then he wouldn’t have met the Old Testament requirements as Messiah. And therefore, far from disqualifying him as the Christ, Jesus’ suffering service is proof that he really is the Christ. But only a few people discerned this Old Testament theme during Jesus’ lifetime. Most of them were so committed to contemporary Jewish speculations regarding the Messiah that they didn’t recognize him when he came.

> Clearly the concept of the Messiah is very important in the Old Testament. The Messiah is the Anointed One, the anointed King. It’s interesting to wonder, how would Christ have come, if in fact Israel had been obedient and had not demanded a human king? But they did. And so you had this succession of “anointed ones” who were not caring for their people, who were not establishing God’s justice in the world, who were self-centered. And so you have this longing emerging in the Old Testament. “Oh, couldn’t we have a Messiah who would be what a Messiah is supposed to be?” And so you have this picture of the King who is coming, but especially in Isaiah there is a fascinating connection between this coming King and the Holy Spirit. The people of the Old Testament are not only longing for a Messiah, they’re also longing for the Holy Spirit to come and enable them to obey their Torah. So it’s interesting to see the ways in which Isaiah, in particular, pictures the relationship between the Messiah and the Spirit. He’ll be filled with the Spirit; he is anointed by the Spirit. He is the one who speaks through the Spirit. And therefore, the apostles don’t seem to be surprised when the risen Jesus says to them, “Wait in Jerusalem for the promise of the Father.” It’s as though, “Ah, finally the Messiah has said something we expected the Messiah to say: ‘I’m going to make the Holy Spirit available.’” What they didn’t do was to understand what the Messiah’s cost would be to bring in this age of God’s justice and the age of the Spirit. They did not connect Isaiah 53 to Isaiah 11. They did not connect the fact that the Messiah would have to die in order to bring in this kingdom of justice and peace and the life of the Spirit. 
> 
> —	Dr. John Oswalt

With these Jewish expectations in mind, let’s turn to Jesus’ ministry as the suffering servant.
