### CONQUERING KING

The Old Testament made it clear that the Messiah would be a descendant of King David, and that his job would be to restore the glory of David’s throne and to rule over Israel forever. We see this prophesied in places like Psalms 89, 110 and 132, and confirmed in Mark 12:35. So, whenever Jesus was identified as the Christ or Messiah, his royal status was also affirmed. For example, this is why he was called “Son of David” in Mark 10:47 48. And Jesus himself openly claimed to be the messianic King in Mark 14:61 62 when he was tried before the Sanhedrin, and in Mark 15:2 when he was tried by Pilate. 
	We’ll consider three aspects of Jesus’ role as the conquering King that Mark emphasized. We’ll consider the fact that Jesus proclaimed his kingdom. We’ll see that he demonstrated his power and authority. And we’ll note that he conquered his enemies. Let’s start with the fact that Jesus proclaimed his kingdom.


#### Proclaimed Kingdom

Recall the way Mark summarized Jesus’ gospel ministry in Mark 1:14-15, where he gave this report:

> After John was put in prison, Jesus went into Galilee, proclaiming the good news of God. "The time has come," he said. "The kingdom of God is near. Repent and believe the good news!" (Mark 1:14-15).
 
The central purpose of Jesus’ preaching ministry was to proclaim the gospel or good news that the kingdom of God was near, and that its blessings were offered to all those who would repent and believe. 
	Jesus also proclaimed his kingdom by teaching its secrets to his disciples. In fact, this is why he often taught in parables — to reveal the kingdom’s secrets to those who were chosen, while hiding them from those who were not. Listen to what Jesus told to his disciples in Mark 4:11-12:

The secret of the kingdom of God has been given to you. But to those on the outside everything is said in parables so that, “they may be ever seeing but never perceiving, and ever hearing but never understanding; otherwise they might turn and be forgiven!” (Mark 4:11-12).

And of course, Jesus often described the kingdom of God. For example, in Mark 10 he identified those who could enter the kingdom with ease, such as children, and those who could enter only with great difficulty, such as the rich. 
	The second aspect of Jesus’ role as the conquering King we’ll mention is that he demonstrated his power and authority as the head of God’s earthly kingdom.


#### Demonstrated Power and Authority

Jesus demonstrated his kingly power and authority primarily through his miracles. For example, Mark 4:41 says that creation obeyed his commands. And demons frequently recognized him as the Son of God, as we see in places like Mark 1:24, 3:11, and 5:7. Jesus’ ability to accomplish his will over nature and demons was a strong demonstration that he had come to bring God’s kingdom to earth. And the same thing is true of his miraculous healings. The blessings of the kingdom include life and health. So, when Jesus healed people, he was distributing kingdom blessings to them, according to his royal privilege.

> Jesus performed miracles probably for at least three reasons: one he wants to show his compassion, God’s compassion towards people who are suffering. So he is healing people because he is moved with compassion, moved with pity for them. He’s wanting to meet their needs, but in doing that, he’s also advertising the truth of who he is, that he is the Messiah and he is bringing kingdom salvation. So the miracles are signposts to his identity, not indicating simply that he is God and so he can do these things, but indicating that he is the Messiah. And so the third feature is that the miracles indicate messianic salvation has come. The age promised by God has broken into history and now we have turning back or rolling back the curse that brings diseases, so he’s healing people. Limitations on food and drink, so he’s providing food and abundant wine and so the miracles are bringing about God’s changes in history because he is the Messiah and that’s his mission to bring this into our lives. 
> 
> —	Dr. John E. McKinley

Besides performing miracles, Jesus also demonstrated his royal power and authority in other ways. For instance, in Mark 1:16-20, Jesus boldly called the disciples to leave their homes, families, and businesses to follow him. He didn’t just give wise suggestions; he demanded a life-changing response. In fact, this is the same command he gives to everyone who hears the gospel, and he continues to expect the same response. Every human being is obligated to obey Jesus, committing their lives to him and following him wherever he leads.
	Perhaps the most memorable example of Jesus’ authority is when he forgave the sins of the paralytic in Mark 2:3-12. Jesus and everyone else knew that only God could forgive sins. But amazingly, Jesus didn’t tell the man to seek forgiveness from God; he authoritatively forgave the man’s sins. As a result, this statement was not just an assurance of the man’s pardon, but also of Jesus’ royal authority. By forgiving the man’s sins, Jesus demonstrated that he had divine authority to administer justice within the kingdom of God. And by healing the man immediately after forgiving him, Jesus proved that his message truly came from God.
	And of course, Jesus’ authority to forgive sins is one of the greatest reasons we have to follow him. Through him, our sins can be blotted out, so that we can be reconciled to God. Rather than being his enemies, we can be loyal citizens of his kingdom, with all the eternal blessings that come with it.
	The third aspect of Jesus’ role as the conquering king we’ll mention is that he conquered his enemies.


#### Conquered Enemies
	
Jesus had many enemies during his life: the Jewish leaders that opposed him, the unbelievers who rejected him, the demons he cast out, and other enemies as well. And in every instance in which he clashed with his enemies, he won. He defeated their arguments; he avoided their plots; he released people from their oppression. He even used their plots to accomplish his own purposes, allowing them to crucify him on the cross so that he could atone for sin. All these victories proved that Jesus really was the Messiah, the Davidic king that had come to bring God’s kingdom to earth.
	One set of enemies Mark frequently mentioned was the demons. In fact, Mark put more emphasis on Jesus’ power over demonic and satanic forces than any other gospel writer did. Mark focused his readers’ attention on Jesus’ control over demons.
	For Mark, this conflict between Jesus and the demons was evidence that Jesus had brought the kingdom of God. The presence of the kingdom did not imply peaceful living without struggle. On the contrary, it implied that Jesus’ kingdom had come to do battle with and eventually defeat the demonic powers of the kingdom of wickedness. For the Christians in Rome, this meant that their sufferings were part of a larger spiritual war. And even though they might be oppressed and persecuted for a time, they were still on the winning side, and one day they would have complete victory. And the same is true for us today.
	But as amazing as Jesus’ power over demons was, his greatest victory was over death itself, which Paul called the “last enemy” in 1 Corinthians 15:26. As we’ve seen, before Jesus died he repeatedly explained to his disciples that his death was the means to his victory. Death was an enemy. But Jesus would conquer and use this enemy for his own purposes. As just one example, listen to how Jesus reassured his disciples during the Last Supper in Mark 14:24-25:

> “This is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many,” he said to them. “I tell you the truth, I will not drink again of the fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it anew in the kingdom of God” (Mark 14:24 25).

As a gentle shepherd, Jesus promised that far from being a cause for discouragement, his death would be God’s covenant victory over sin and its consequences. Jesus also promised that this would not be the last meal he would share with his disciples. After all the horrible things that were about to happen — his arrest, trials, suffering and death — he would drink again with them when his kingdom was consummated in all of its glory. From Mark’s original readers in the ancient world to the church throughout the ages, our celebrations of the Lord’s Supper remind us that Christ’s victory will eventually overcome all our sufferings. One day, we will be rewarded by celebrating a victory meal with Jesus himself.
	In his crucifixion, death, and burial, Jesus allowed death to have power over him for a time, so that he could redeem us from sin. But he didn’t remain under that power. In his resurrection, he conquered even death, proving beyond all doubt that he is the Christ, the messianic King God has sent to restore his kingdom to earth. 
	But if Jesus came to be king, does that mean he failed? This question must have troubled Mark’s persecuted audience, just as it has troubled many Christians in every age. After all, we don’t see Jesus reigning on earth right now. It doesn’t look like he accomplished everything the messianic king was supposed to do.

> In Mark’s gospel, in the first half of the gospel, Jesus’ kingship is emphasized quite strongly, so Jesus demonstrates that he has power over sickness. He demonstrates that he has power over nature. He demonstrates that he can gather a following around himself. And all the things that you’d expect a God-king amongst us to do. But the surprise the disciples find difficult to grasp, particularly in Mark’s gospel, is that when Jesus announces or affirms that he is King, as is slowly dawning on their minds, he then goes on to say that he will be rejected, that he will suffer and that he will die. And initially, I think, they found it very difficult to grasp the idea that the King should come among them as one who serves, but actually, with the benefit of hindsight, looking back at the predictions of the coming King, you can put together passages like Isaiah 53 which speak about a king who comes, but who also will suffer and who will die. And Jesus believed that he was doing that to pay the ransom price for human sin, and that on the cross he would lay aside his majesty in order that he could atone for the sins of humankind. But of course, even that’s not the end of the story because then Christ rose from the dead and he was exalted to heaven, and now he occupies the place as King over all creation and he will come back as judge of the living and the dead. 
> 
> —	Rev. Dr. Simon Vibert

Jesus was not the kind of Messiah most people expected in the first century, and he is not the kind of Messiah most people want today. He lived a life of suffering servitude, and he called his kingdom people to do the same. In his parables of the sower and the mustard seed in Mark 4, Jesus taught that his followers would be troubled by persecution, and that it would look like his kingdom was going to be defeated. 
	But he also taught that in some people the word of the kingdom takes root and bears fruit. They embrace the kingdom of God in obedience. They follow Jesus, and increase the kingdom of God.
	The kingdom is temporarily veiled; it grows slowly; it even suffers. But eventually, the kingdom of God will come in all its fullness. As Jesus said in Mark 4:22:

>  Whatever is hidden is meant to be disclosed, and whatever is concealed is meant to be brought out into the open (Mark 4:22).

Mark's message to his original audience and to us is clear. The kingdom of God grows mysteriously, struggling against persecution, suffering and enemies. But it also grows certainly, according to God’s timetable. God’s kingdom and Jesus’ ministry cannot be stopped. One day, Jesus will return to finish what he started. He will finally and completely defeat all his enemies, and we ourselves will be glorified, entering the final state of an eternal life that can never end. At that time, there will be no Old Testament prophecy left unfulfilled. He will have accomplished everything.
