## CONCLUSION

In this lesson we’ve considered the background of Mark’s gospel in terms of Mark’s authorship, his original audience and the occasion of his writing. We have also explored the structure and content of his gospel. And we have focused on two of its major themes: the identity of Jesus as the suffering servant and conquering king. If we read this gospel with these ideas in mind, we’ll find that we understand Mark more fully, and that we make better applications to our own lives in the modern world.
	The Gospel of Mark highlights aspects of Jesus’ character and ministry that aren’t always emphasized in the other gospels. It shows us Jesus as a powerful, energetic, active master of his surroundings. But it also shows us that even in his power, Jesus willingly took on the role of suffering servant. And Mark calls us to a variety of responses to our Lord’s example. He wants us to fall at Jesus’ feet in amazement, to listen to him in silence, and to respond to his words with radical obedience. He wants us to be willing to suffer for the kingdom of God, just as Jesus did. And he wants us to be encouraged, knowing that when Jesus conquered his enemies through the cross, he also secured victory for us. And it’s in that hope that we persevere until the day Jesus returns in glory to give that victory to us in the consummation of his kingdom.
 
## CONTRIBUTORS

Dr. Pete Alwinson (Host) is the Executive Director of FORGE: City Wide Ministry to Men with Man in the Mirror. He is also the founding pastor of Willow Creek Presbyterian Church (PCA) in Winter Springs, FL, where he served as Senior Pastor for 26 years. Dr. Alwinson received his M.Div. from Trinity Evangelical Divinity School and his D.Min. from Reformed Theological Seminary. He is an Adjunct Professor at Reformed Theological Seminary, a Board Member of Key Life Network, and the author of Like Father, Like Son: How Knowing God as Father Changes Men. 


Dr. Richard Bauckham is a New Testament scholar and author and is Professor Emeritus at the University of St. Andrews in Scotland.

Dr. Stephen Chan is Associate Professor of Theology and Religious Studies at Seattle University.

Rev. Larry Cockrell is Senior Pastor of Household of Faith Church and faculty member of Birmingham Theological Seminary.

Rev. Michael J. Glodo is Associate Professor of Pastoral Theology at Reformed Theological Seminary in Orlando, Florida.

Dr. Jeff Lowman is Senior Pastor at Evangel Church PCA in Alabaster, Alabama and Professor of Homiletics and Systematic Theology at Birmingham Theological Seminary.

Dr. John E. McKinley is Associate Professor of Biblical and Theological Studies at Talbot School of Theology.

Dr. John Oswalt is the Visiting Distinguished Professor of Old Testament at Asbury Theological Seminary.

Dr. Gregory R. Perry is Vice President for Strategic Projects at Third Millennium Ministries and President of Thirdmill Seminary. He served previously as Associate Professor of New Testament and the Director of City Ministry Initiative at Covenant Theological Seminary.

Dr. Robert L. Plummer is Collin and Evelyn Aikman Professor of Biblical Studies at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary and the Founder and Host of The Daily Dose of Greek screencast..

Dr. Thomas R. Schreiner is the James Buchanan Harrison Professor of New Testament Interpretation and Associate Dean of Scripture and Interpretation at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.

Dr. Mark Strauss is Professor of New Testament at Bethel Seminary, San Diego.

Dr. Frank Thielman is the Presbyterian Professor of Divinity in New Testament at Beeson Divinity School.

Dr. K. Erik Thoennes is Professor of Biblical and Theological Studies at Biola University’s Talbot School of Theology and is Chair of the Biblical and Theological Studies Theology Department.

Rev. Dr. Simon Vibert is Vicar of Christ Church Virginia Water in Surrey, England, and the former Vice Principal and Director of the School of Preaching at Wycliffe Hall, Oxford.

Dr. Peter Walker has served as Professor of Biblical Studies at Trinity School for Ministry and as Associate Vice-Principal at Wycliffe Hall, Oxford. He is currently an instructor with Jerusalem Center for Biblical Studies.
 
## GLOSSARY
 
 
Anti-Marcionite Prologues – Ancient prologues to the Gospels (ca. A.D. 160-180) that assign authorship and give biographical details for the gospel writers

Barnabas – Friend of the apostle Paul and cousin of John Mark (author of the second gospel) who accompanied Paul on his first missionary journey

Beelzebub – Also known as Beelzebul; “the prince of demons”; another name for Satan 

Boanerges – Aramaic expression meaning "sons of thunder," used by Christ when referring to James and John

Capernaum – City on the northern coast of the Sea of Galilee where Jesus often preached and performed miracles early in his ministry  

Elijah – Old Testament prophet who appeared along with Moses at the transfiguration of Jesus

Eusebius – (A.D. 263-340) Early Christian historian who wrote Ecclesiastical History

Gentile – Non-Jewish person

Herodians – Jewish sect that held political power in Jesus’ day and supported King Herod’s dynasty; joined with the Pharisees in opposition to Jesus

Irenaeus – (ca. A.D. 130-202) Second-century bishop and early Christian writer who wrote Against Heresies in which he refuted Gnosticism and affirmed the validity of the four gospels

James – Son of Zebedee and brother of John; martyred under Herod Agrippa
 
John – Son of Zebedee and brother of James; one of the twelve Apostles; author of the gospel of John; 1, 2, 3 John; and the book of Revelation; sometimes called "the disciple Jesus loved"

John the Baptist – New Testament prophet who called for true repentance and proclaimed that the arrival of God's kingdom was near; identified Jesus as the Messiah and prepared the way for Jesus’ public ministry

Judas Iscariot – One of Jesus’ special group of 12 disciples; betrayed Jesus to the chief priests and elders for 30 pieces of silver

Luke – Author of the third gospel and the book of Acts; a Gentile convert to Christianity and one of Paul's co-workers; believed to have been a physician

Mark – Also known as John Mark; author of the Gospel of Mark and cousin of Barnabas; accompanied Paul and Barnabas on their first missionary journey  

Matthew – One of the twelve Apostles and author of the Gospel of Matthew; a tax collector when Jesus called him; also known as Levi  

Messiah – Hebrew word meaning "anointed one"; the great King from David’s royal line who would bring about the transition from this age to the age to come; translated "Christos" in Greek

Moses – Old Testament prophet and deliverer who led the Israelites out of Egypt; man with whom God made a national "covenant of law" and who administered the Ten Commandments and the Book of the Covenant to the Israelites; also appeared with Elijah at Jesus' transfiguration 
Nero – Roman emperor from A.D. 54-68 who persecuted Christians; blamed the Christians for a fire in Rome in A.D. 64; executed Paul (according to tradition) 

nomists – First-century Jews who believed that God would not intervene to establish his kingdom until Israel had become obedient to the Law of Moses

Olivet Discourse – Name commonly given to the discourse between Jesus and his disciples on the Mount of Olives regarding events in the future

Papias – (ca. A.D. 70 - 163) Early Christian writer and Bishop of Hierapolis; quoted by Eusebius in regard to who wrote the Gospels

parable – A short allegorical story used to teach a moral or spiritual lesson

Peter – One of Jesus' twelve apostles; also called Simon; a leader in the early Christian church; preached on the Day of Pentecost in Acts 2; according to church historians, Mark relied on Peter's accounts of Christ's life to write his gospel

Pharisees – Jewish religious sect from the first century known for their strict observance of the Law; believed in the future resurrection, but also believed that God would not intervene until Israel became obedient to the Law
  
Pilate – Roman prefect under Tiberius Caesar from A.D. 26 to 36 who authorized Jesus’ crucifixion; also known as Pontius Pilate

Rufus – One of the sons of the man who carried the cross of Christ; probably the same person mentioned by Paul in Romans as a member of the church in Rome

Sadducees – Jewish sect at the time of Christ that only adhered to the five books written by Moses (Genesis–Deuteronomy) and did not believe in angels, spirits, or the resurrection of the dead 

Sanhedrin – The highest court and council of ancient Israel that had both religious and civil jurisdiction 

Silas – Paul's companion on his second missionary journey 

Transfiguration – Event recorded in Matthew 17:1-8, Mark 9:2-8, and Luke 9:28-36 when Jesus was revealed to his disciples in glory

Zealots – First-century Jewish sect that believed God would usher in the age to come only when the Jews rose up militarily against the Roman rulers
