	
# Theological Foundations – Module Four – The Holy Spirit
## Discussion Questions 

1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	What personal attributes does the Bible ascribe to the Holy Spirit? How do these attributes demonstrate his personhood?


3.	What is the Holy Spirit’s relationship to the other two persons of the Trinity? Why is the Holy Spirit called the “third person” of the Trinity?


4.	Discuss the Holy Spirit’s creative power and explain how it is seen in the natural world, in spiritual gifts, and in the personal renewal of human spirits and hearts.


5.	What is sanctification and how does the Holy Spirit work to sanctify God’s people?


6.	How should an understanding of the divinity of the Spirit affect our prayer life?


7.	In what ways are you tempted to think of the Spirit as an impersonal force or power?


8.	What evidence have you seen in your own life that the Spirit has been applying salvation to you?


9.	Take some time to write down your gifts and abilities. How might these be the Spirit’s gifts to you for the building up of the church?


10.	In what areas do you most need the Spirit’s continuing sanctification in your life?


11.	How might you make more use of the Spirit’s illumination and inward leading in your life?
 
REVIEW STATEMENT on THE HOLY SPIRIT - WORK: The work of the Holy Spirit includes his creative power, his sanctification of God's people, his administration of grace and the revelation he provides. These aspects of the Holy Spirit’s work have a profound impact on every aspect of our daily lives, not just as believers, but as human beings. We all live in a world that exists today because of the Holy Spirit’s creative power. The work of the Holy Spirit both saves and sanctifies us, and he even inspires the Scriptures that guide us in our daily lives.

CASE STUDY: Akim was planting a church in a place where people rarely had access to good health care. When they were sick they would typically have to get up very early to go stand in line and wait to be attended. After a very long wait, the doctor would see them and usually just give them pain medicine and send them home. In light of this poor care, the leaders of the church gathered together to discuss the issue. They decided to take seriously the power of the Spirit to heal people. “After all,” said one of the leaders, “the apostle James tells us to ask the elders of the church to pray when we are sick.” So, they began to encourage those who were sick in the church (with non-critical or non-life-threatening illnesses) to ask the elders of the church to pray for them. They saw the power of the Spirit at work. He didn’t heal everyone (at least not in the way they hoped for), and it wasn't always in a spectacular way, but he regularly healed his people. Twice they prayed for someone the doctors said was about to die, and both times, the Lord healed them.
## Reflection Questions 	
1.	How seriously do you take the power of the Spirit to heal and renew, even in the physical world? Elaborate.
2.	Do the people in your church take seriously the admonition in James 5:14 to ask the elders to pray for the sick? Why or why not?
3.	Have you refrained from praying over and/or ministering to people out of fear that the Holy Spirit wouldn’t act? Elaborate.
4.	If you have personally seen the Holy Spirit heal someone, share your experience(s) with the group.
## Action Assignments
•	If you have failed to believe in the creative power of the Holy Spirit, pray a prayer of repentance. Ask the Lord to help you believe.
•	If you have allowed fear to keep you from reaching out to people and using your gifts to bless them in the power of the Spirit, repent and ask the Lord to help you overcome that fear.
•	Reach out to an unbeliever with the intention of being a blessing and seeing them eventually become a believer.
•	When you see an unbeliever who becomes softened by some frightening event, don't automatically assume that he or she has become a Christian. They may go back to suppressing the truth when the fear has passed. Use the opportunity to point them to Christ.

