## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 28:20 – 1:34:45

II. Structure and Content

      A. Jesus' Beginnings (1:5-4:13)

   	1. Birth Announcements

   	2. Births and Childhoods

   	3. John's Identification of Jesus

   	4. Confirmations as Son of God

      B. Jesus' Ministry in Galilee (4:14-9:50)

   	1. Sermon at Nazareth

   	2. Teaching and Miracles	

   	3. John the Baptist
	
   	4. Teaching and Miracles

   	5. Preparation of the Twelve Apostles

      C. Jesus' Journey to Jerusalem (9:51-19:27)

      D. Jesus' Ministry in and Near Jerusalem (19:28-21:38)

      E. Jesus' Crucifixion and Resurrection (22:1-24:53)


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. According to the lesson, all four gospels deal with the life of Christ chronologically on a larger scale, but they use other guidelines on a smaller scale. What is the main guideline that Luke uses on a smaller scale to organize the events of the life of Christ? 

2. Arrange the five major sections of the Gospel of Luke in their proper order, giving the names and the references, as taught in the lesson.

3. What is the name of the angel who announced in Daniel 9 that the exile would last hundreds of years, and who announced both the birth of John the Baptist and the birth of Jesus?

4. Describe the identity of each of the following:
	Elizabeth
	Zachariah
	Simeon

5. What was the relationship between Mary and Elizabeth?

6. Why Jesus was baptized by John the Baptist?

7. Make sure you are familiar with the contents of the following Bible passages:  
       Luke 4:18-21
       Luke 22:67-70
       Luke 23:43
       Luke 23:46

8. How does the lesson explain the difference between the "Sermon on the Plain" and the "Sermon on the Mount"? 

9. How did Jesus answer the disciples of John the Baptist when he sent them to ask Jesus if He was the Messiah? 

10. What was the main purpose of Jesus' miracles? 

11. Mention the topics of Jesus' teaching during the time of His journey toward Jerusalem. 


 
## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 1:34:45 – 2:08:11

III. Major Themes

      A. Description of Salvation

      B. God as Savior

  	1. God's Power

  	2. God's Plan

  	3. God's Son

      C. People that are Saved 

  	1. Gentiles

  	2. Sinners

  	3. Women

  	4.  Poor

Conclusion


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. List the major themes of Luke, as taught in the lesson.

2. According to the lesson, what is the special focus of the Gospel of Luke? 

3. How does the lesson define salvation?

4. According to the lesson, salvation is primarily a matter of ______________.

5. What does Jesus teach about the possibility of salvation with men?

6. To show that Jesus was fulfilling God's plan, Luke often says that what Jesus did was ________. 

7. The lesson teaches that according to the Gospel of Luke, "the least, the last, and the lost will become ___________________ of the kingdom of God."

8. What groups are included as surprising types of people that are saved, according to the Gospel of Luke? 

