## CONCLUSION

In this lesson, we have examined the authorship of the book of Acts; we have described its historical setting; and we have explored its theological background. Keeping these details in mind as we study the book of Acts will help us to discover its original meaning, and to apply it properly in our own lives.
As we continue in this series, we will see how the background to Acts opens many windows into this wonderful book. We will discover how Luke’s inspired record of the early church led Theophilus and the early church into faithful service to Christ. And we will see that the book of Acts offers crucial guidance for the church today as we continue to proclaim the gospel of the kingdom to our own world.


 


Dr. Hans F. Bayer (Host) is Professor of New Testament and Chair of the New Testament Department at Covenant Theological Seminary in St. Louis, Missouri. Dr. Bayer received his M.A. and M.Div. from Ashland Theological Seminary, and his Ph.D. from University of Aberdeen in Scotland. Born and raised in Germany, Dr. Bayer taught for ten years at the German Theological Seminary at Giessen, where he also planted and co-pastored a church. He lectures and preaches regularly throughout the U.S. and Europe and has published numerous English and German monographs, essays, dictionary articles, and commentaries, primarily on the Gospels and the Book of Acts. He is also the author of A Theology of Mark: The Dynamic Between Christology and Authentic Discipleship (P&R, 2012).

 
## GLOSSARY
 
 
Abraham – Old Testament patriarch, son of Terah, father of the nation of Israel with whom God made a covenant in Genesis 15 and 17 promising innumerable descendants and a special land

Anti-Marcionite Prologues – Ancient prologues to the Gospels (ca. A.D. 160-180) that assign authorship and give biographical details for the gospel writers 

apocalyptic/apocalypticists – Name given to first-century Jewish sects that expected God to intervene quickly and catastrophically to destroy their enemies and establish the age to come

Clement of Alexandria – (ca. A.D. 150-215) Early church father and writer from Alexandria

David – Second Old Testament king of Israel who received the promise that his descendant would sit on the throne and reign forever

euangelion kata Ioannan – Greek phrase (transliteration) meaning "the gospel according to John"

euangelion kata Loukan – Greek phrase (transliteration) meaning "the gospel according to Luke"

Eusebius – (A.D. 263-340) Early Christian historian who wrote Ecclesiastical History

Josephus – (A.D. 37-ca. 100) Jewish historian from the 1st century A.D. who wrote Antiquities

kratiste/kratistos – Greek word (transliteration) meaning "most excellent," a person of highest honor, sometimes used for Roman governors; used by Luke in his gospel and the book of Acts when referring to Theophilus 
Luke – Author of the third gospel and the book of Acts; a Gentile convert to Christianity and one of Paul's co-workers; believed to have been a physician

Moses – Old Testament prophet and deliverer who led the Israelites out of Egypt; man with whom God made a national "covenant of law" and who administered the Ten Commandments and the Book of the Covenant to the Israelites; also appeared with Elijah at Jesus' transfiguration

Muratorian Fragment – Earliest known document listing the New Testament books that the church considered canonical, dated A.D. 170-180

Nero – Roman emperor from A.D. 54-68 who persecuted Christians; blamed the Christians for a fire in Rome in A.D. 64; executed Paul (according to tradition) 

Papyrus 75 – Early manuscript containing portions of the gospels of Luke and John, probably copied between A.D. 175 and A.D. 200

Pharisees – Jewish religious sect from the first century known for their strict observance of the Law; believed in the future resurrection, but also believed that God would not intervene until Israel became obedient to the Law

Rome – Capital city of the world’s largest imperial power in New Testament times; city where Paul was imprisoned for two years and preached the gospel boldly and without hindrance

Theophilus – Person to whom Luke addressed both his gospel and the book of Acts

Zealots – First-century Jewish sect that believed God would usher in the age to come only when the Jews rose up militarily against the Roman rulers
