# Study Guide 
# Old Testament Foundations
# Module Ten – An Overview of Exodus

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for this course’s final exam.

**********************************

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 – 32:37

Introduction

I. Initial Considerations	

      A. Authorship	

      B. Occasion	

      C. Original Meaning
	
  	1. Backgrounds	
	
  	2. Models		

  	3. Foreshadows	
	
      D. Modern Application	


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. Why do critical scholars think Moses did not write Exodus? 

2. What is the evangelical position regarding the authorship of Exodus?

3. According to Exodus 16:35, by when was the book of Exodus already completed?

4. What is the unique, prominent purpose that Moses had for writing Exodus, according to the lesson?

5. What event did Moses include in Exodus as a background that would form the basis for the moral obligations of the second generation as they entered the Promised Land?

6. What story did Moses include in Exodus that represented a positive model for the second generation to emulate as they served God at the tabernacle later on?

7. What does Exodus 13.18 narrate that is a foreshadow of how the second generation of Israel was preparing to conquer Canaan?  

8. What future experience of Christians is parallel to the experience of Israel as they ended their journey from Egypt to the Promised Land?

9. In what way is God's presence shown in the New Testament that is even greater than God's presence in the tabernacle in Moses' day?

10. What does 1 Corinthians 10:11 tell us about the purpose of events recorded in Exodus?

