## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 32:37 – 1:11:05

II. Structure & Content

      A. Deliverance from Egypt	
	
  	1. Before Deliverance	

  	2. During Deliverance	

      B. Preparation for Canaan	

  	1. Israel’s Covenant	

  	2. Israel’s Tabernacle	


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. What are the two main divisions of the book of Exodus?

2. What did the name "Moses" mean in Egyptian? In Hebrew?

3. How did the story of Moses’ flight from Egypt in Exodus 2:11-15 vindicate Moses as Israel’s leader?

4. How did the story of Moses' encounter with God at the burning bush vindicate Moses' leadership?

5. What was the last judgment on the Egyptians that finally convinced Pharaoh to let the Israelites go? 

6. What was the attitude of the Israelites toward God and toward Moses after crossing the Red Sea?

7. What was the attitude of the Israelites toward Moses in the desert of Shur and the desert of Sin?

8. Why did God want the people to hear Him speaking to Moses in a dense cloud at Mt. Sinai?

9. Explain the difference between the Ten Commandments and the Book of the Covenant.

10. What difference between the social structure in ancient Israel and in ancient Babylon is highlighted in the lesson?

11. What do recent archeological discoveries reveal about the custom of the Pharaohs in ancient Egypt as they went out to battle with their armies? What does it suggest regarding the purpose of Israel's tabernacle?

12.  What does the relief of Ramses II in the Abu Simbel temple, which commemorates his battle of Kadesh, have in common with the tabernacle?

13. How did the Israelites break the covenant with God at Mt. Sinai?

14. Why did God decide not to destroy all of the Israelites and not to remove His presence from Israel after they broke the covenant at Mt. Sinai?

15. What is depicted in Exodus 40:1-33?

16. How did God show His presence with Israel as they traveled with the tabernacle?
 
## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 1:11:05 – 1:51:38

III. Major Themes

      A. Covenant Keeper	

      B. Victorious Warrior
	
  	1. In Egypt	

  	2. In the March	

      C. Covenant Lawgiver	

      D. Present Warrior		

Conclusion 	


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. What theme of Exodus is emphasized in this lesson? 

2. What are the four ways in which the book of Exodus emphasizes God's kingship, as highlighted in this lesson?

3. When Scripture mentions God as covenant maker, why does this point to His kingship?

4. What is a "suzerain-vassal treaty"?

5. Exodus 2:24 says, "God heard [the Israelites’] groaning and he remembered his ____________ with Abraham, with Isaac and with Jacob."

6. What is the Hebrew word that is the root of all three phrases used in Exodus 3:14-15: "I am that I am," "I am," and "Lord"?

7. What is the origin and meaning of the name "Yahweh"?

8. When God brought miraculous judgments against Pharaoh and the Egyptians, such as turning the Nile to blood and sending the plague of frogs, over whom was He also showing His kingly victory?

9. What are the three main uses of the law, according to Protestant tradition? Which one is emphasized in Exodus?

10. According to the lesson, why is it important to remember that God gave the law to Israel AFTER redeeming them from Egypt and showing His mercy to them?

11. What was in the tabernacle that especially represented God's presence? 

12. How does John 1:14 make a connection between Jesus and the tabernacle?
