	
# Theological Foundations – Module Ten – Authority in Theology
## Discussion Questions 

1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	What were the effects of the medieval period’s view of the authority of Scripture and the church?


3.	Describe the posture the early Protestants took regarding the authority of Scripture in regards to inspiration, meaning and obscurity.


4.	Explain how contemporary Protestants understand the authority of the church in the past and our contemporary setting.


5.	The writings of the early church fathers have influenced the church throughout its history. Is this good or bad? Should modern theology seek to move past these primitive views? Or should we rely strongly on the wisdom of those who have gone before us?


6.	Why is it important to maintain a balance between the divine origin of Scripture and the human origin of Scripture?


7.	What are some practical ways we can observe the principle of “always reforming” in the modern church? What are some areas in your own church that need to be reformed?


8.	How can the model of the cone of certainty aide you in assigning priorities and levels of conviction to your understandings of scriptural passages that are not entirely clear?


9.	What are the dangers of Traditionalism and Biblicism? Have you seen these extremes in the church today? 


10.	There were several “extreme” positions mentioned in this lesson. Did any of them describe your own approach to theology? Which ones? What practical steps might you take to adopt more responsible perspectives?
 
REVIEW STATEMENT on CONTEMPORARY PROTESTANT AUTHORITIES: Early Protestants understood that the Holy Spirit had taught the church many truths in the past. They sought to give proper respect and submission to the teachings of the fathers, the creeds and the longstanding traditions of the church by accepting them as provisional judgments. But they also balanced this practice with a strong affirmation of the supremacy of Scripture over past teachings of the church. We should not confuse our current understanding of Scripture with Scripture itself. The church should always be reforming itself, examining its creeds, confessions, writings and practices in light of Scripture. 

CASE STUDY: Rev. Donoso created among the people of his church a sense that they were the only church in town that really understood the truth of Scripture. He created a sense of superiority over the members of other churches — as well as a disdain for them. Rev. Donoso would sometimes mention them in his sermons in derogatory ways. The members of his church were proud of the fact that they had the truth. Most of the people in his church came to view members of other churches as not saved. Rev. Donoso never met with other Protestant pastors for prayer. Members of his church didn't have fellowship with the members of other churches.
## Reflection Questions
1.	When you cut yourself off from Christians of other theological traditions, how can you be challenged to distinguish between Scripture and your understanding of Scripture?  
2.	Has your church or pastor interacted with Christians from other theological traditions? Why or why not? If you don't know, ask the pastor. If you are the pastor, you yourself can answer this question.
3.	Do you interact with Christians from other theological traditions? If you do, how would you characterize your interaction on theological issues? Discuss this in your group.
a.	Cordial but not deep.
b.	Deep and with a focus on defending one's position.
c.	A learning attitude.
d.	You don't interact with Christians from other traditions
e.	Other: Explain
## Action Assignments
Here are some things you can do to help you distinguish between Scripture and your current understanding of Scripture:
•	Read books by Christians from other theological traditions and examine their arguments using Scripture. Is there any sense in which they might have a point?
•	Read critiques of Christianity written by non-Christians and examine their arguments using Scripture. Is there any sense in which they might have a point?
•	Interact with Christians from other theological traditions with a learning attitude in submission to Scripture.
•	Interact with Christians from other cultures with a learning attitude in submission to Scripture. 

