# RELEVANCE

There are countless reasons why Christians should expect the Old Testament to have significance for their lives. But perhaps the most important piece of evidence comes from Jesus and his first century apostles and prophets. These men confidently taught that the Old Testament was not simply God’s authoritative Word for ancient Israel, but that it was God’s Word for Christians in their day as well. Many Christians today believe that the New Testament was given to do away with the Old Testament. But in reality, Jesus and his apostles and prophets said just the opposite. They taught that the Old Testament is crucial for faithful Christian living in every age.

The New Testament teaches in many places that the Old Testament has relevance for our lives, but we’ll look in just two directions. First, we’ll look at some of the teachings of Jesus, and second, we’ll consider some of the teachings of the apostle Paul. Let’s think first about Jesus’ teachings regarding the Old Testament’s relevance.

## TEACHINGS OF JESUS

To understand what Jesus taught about the relevance and authority of the Old Testament for his followers, we’ll look briefly into two sides of his teaching. We’ll start with some passages that often appear to be negative comments Jesus made about the Old Testament. And then, we’ll examine his clearly positive affirmations of the Old Testament’s relevance. Let’s begin with some of Jesus’ comments that many interpreters have taken as negative outlooks on the Old Testament.

## Negative Comments

Most of us are familiar with Jesus’ Sermon on the Mount in Matthew 5–7. At one point in this Sermon, Jesus touched on several ethical issues. His approach to these issues has left many well-meaning believers with the impression that Jesus opposed or corrected the teachings of the Old Testament. Listen to these familiar passages. In Matthew 5:21-22 we read these words about murder:

> You have heard that it was said to those of old, “You shall not murder; and whoever murders will be liable to judgment.” But I say to you that everyone who is angry with his brother will be liable to judgment (Matthew 5:21-22).

In Matthew 5:27-28 Jesus referred to adultery in this way:

> You have heard that it was said, “You shall not commit adultery.” But I say to you that everyone who looks at a woman with lustful intent has already committed adultery with her in his heart (Matthew 5:27-28).

In Matthew 5:31-32 he spoke of divorce:

> It was also said, “Whoever divorces his wife, let him give her a certificate of divorce.” But I say to you that everyone who divorces his wife, except on the ground of sexual immorality, makes her commit adultery, and whoever marries a divorced woman commits adultery (Matthew 5:31-32).

In Matthew 5:33-34 we see the pattern again as Jesus addressed oaths:

> Again you have heard that it was said to those of old, “You shall not swear falsely, but shall perform to the Lord what you have sworn.” But I say to you, Do not take an oath at all (Matthew 5:33-34).

Jesus also spoke of revenge in Matthew 5:38-39:

> You have heard that it was said, “An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth.” But I say to you, Do not resist the one who is evil. But if anyone slaps you on the right cheek, turn to him the other also (Matthew 5:38-39).

And finally, Christ addressed the issue of love for enemies in this way in Matthew 5:43-44:

> You have heard that it was said, “You shall love your neighbor and hate your enemy.” But I say to you, Love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you (Matthew 5:43-44).

All followers of Christ should agree that Jesus is God’s supreme revelation and that his teachings were much fuller than the teachings of the Old Testament. He penetrated to the heart and expanded to the farthest horizons in ways that the Old Testament never reached. But unfortunately, many Christians have concluded that Jesus’ view on murder, adultery, divorce, oaths, revenge and love for enemies actually contradicted the Old Testament.

Many believers mistakenly believe that Jesus rejected Old Testament teachings in favor of his own, more comprehensive instructions. Now, if this popular outlook is anywhere near the truth, then we have good reason to think that Jesus came to turn us away from the ethical authority of the Old Testament. But when we reflect more closely on what Jesus actually said in Matthew 5, we discover that this outlook is far from adequate. Jesus didn’t contradict any of the Old Testament in any way. Rather, he affirmed its authority and contradicted common misunderstandings of the Old Testament in his day.

Instead of disagreeing with the Old Testament, Jesus objected to the ways that many scribes and Pharisees interpreted the Old Testament in his day. At the time of Jesus, few people had direct access to the Bible. For this reason, ordinary people in Israel relied heavily on the oral instructions of their religious leaders. But rather than teaching from the Old Testament itself, the scribes and Pharisees often based their instruction on traditions they had added to the Old Testament. Sadly, these traditions tended to focus on outward obedience rather than on the condition of the heart — a primary concern in both Jesus’ teaching and in the Old Testament.

In general terms, Jesus contrasted his own teachings — which were in harmony with the Old Testament — with points of view that had been “said” and “heard.” In other words, he was addressing oral traditions. When Jesus and other New Testament figures referred to the Old Testament, they always spoke of what was “written” or “read.” And nowhere in the New Testament does Jesus refute anything introduced in that manner. So, in the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus wasn’t disagreeing with what was written in the Old Testament, but rather with the oral traditions perpetuated by other teachers in Israel. In this light, we should look more closely at what Jesus actually said about these oral interpretations.

> When Jesus speaks in the Sermon on the Mount using this phrase, “You have heard it said, but I say to you” he was not saying that the Old Testament Law is now being nullified. In fact, he says quite the opposite very explicitly, that “I have come to fulfill the Law.” But what Jesus is doing is he is using a well-known rabbinic technique that teachers of the Law would use to talk about their own teaching authority. “You’ve heard different people in the tradition say these things about the teachings of the Law, but I say to you…” And that comes with a present authority, with additional authority. And so, Jesus is establishing his teaching authority with this well-known teaching technique, not to discount the Old Testament Law, but to say something very important theologically and Christologically — that it’s important to interpret the Old Testament Law in relation to me and to my teaching of the Law. — Dr. Gregory R. Perry
