## Positive Affirmations

> Paul was Jewish. He always was Jewish. His background was Jewish… He talks about his Jewishness. He was committed to the Scriptures. In Philippians he says as a Pharisee he was committed to that. When he tells the story in Galatians of his background he talks about his zeal far exceeded his peers in knowing his ancestors. And he’s talking about Judaism there. He’s talking about committing himself to the teachings of the Old Testament, the teachings of the Hebrew Bible. And it’s his Jewish background that comes into his teaching of who Jesus is when he goes to the Gentiles. When he goes to the nations, he wants them to understand that the coming of Jesus was the coming of the Jewish Messiah, that the coming of the gospel to the nations was the fulfillment of the promises made to Abraham… He doesn’t reject the Scriptures, but he now understands them anew. He understands that Jesus is the fulfillment of everything the Hebrew Bible spoke to. — Dr. Mark A. Jennings

Consider what Paul wrote about the Old Testament in Romans 15:4:

> For whatever was written in former days was written for our instruction, that through endurance and through the encouragement of the Scriptures we might have hope (Romans 15:4).

When Paul spoke here of what “was written in former days” and “the Scriptures,” he had in mind the Old Testament. According to this passage, the Old Testament is essential to developing and maintaining our Christian hope. The stories, the laws, the psalms, the prophecies of the Old Testament, are “for our instruction.”

But without a doubt, Paul delivered his strongest and clearest affirmation of the relevance of the Old Testament in 2 Timothy 3:16-17. Here he wrote:

> All Scripture is breathed out by God and profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, and for training in righteousness, that the man of God may be complete, equipped for every good work (2 Timothy 3:16-17).

Most Christians are familiar with this verse, but we often imagine that the words “all Scripture” refer to the New Testament. Well, there’s no doubt that these words have implications for our outlooks on the New Testament. But when Paul wrote to Timothy about “all Scripture,” he had in mind especially the Old Testament. Listen to the wonderful things that the Old Testament is able to give us — It is able to teach, offer reproof, correct and train in righteousness, equipping us for every good work. In short, Paul said the Old Testament was indispensable to Christian living.

> So, when Paul says, “All Scripture is God-breathed and is useful for teaching, and correcting, and rebuking and training in righteousness,” he’s talking about the Old Testament. He’s talking about the Old Testament’s relevance. And he says that it is not only relevant, but that it is thoroughly relevant… Without the Old Testament, we don’t have any context for understanding various terms that the New Testament uses. For example, God — Who is this God? Or Christ — What is a Christ? Or concepts like sin, salvation, even the gospel. These are all terms that are introduced and developed in the Old Testament, and it’s only by understanding their use in the Old Testament that we can read the New Testament in an informed and responsible way. — Dr. Matthew Newkirk

We’ve seen that we should study the Old Testament because of the challenge of its distance and the expectation of its relevance. Now, let’s turn to our third main topic in this lesson: the task of making applications of the Old Testament to our lives today.
