# APPLICATION

It’s one thing to say, as we should, that the Old Testament is relevant for Christians today, but it’s quite another to put this truth into practice. Sometimes it’s not difficult to see how the Old Testament applies to us, but other times it’s very difficult because of the distance between us and the Old Testament. Now, it’s reassuring that the Holy Spirit helps followers of Christ study and apply the Old Testament. He teaches us in ways that go far beyond what we could accomplish in our own strength. But it’s our responsibility to study the Old Testament as deeply as we can so that we can apply it rightly to our lives today.

The apostle Paul spoke of this responsibility to Timothy. In 2 Timothy 2:15, Paul said:

> Do your best to present yourself to God as one approved, a worker who has no need to be ashamed, rightly handling the word of truth (2 Timothy 2:15).

As Paul put it here, to be approved, we must approach the Old Testament as “a worker” — ergates (ἐργάτης) in Greek — meaning a laborer who works diligently to rightly handle God’s word.

We’ll look into the modern application of the Old Testament in three steps. First, we’ll identify the challenges we must overcome as we try to apply the Old Testament to our lives. Second, we’ll consider the connections that make it possible to apply it to our day. And third, we’ll examine the developments that we must acknowledge as we apply it. Let’s begin with the challenges we face as we apply the Old Testament to our lives today.

## CHALLENGES

As we saw earlier in this lesson, God first gave the Old Testament to his people who lived long ago so that they could live by it in their own times. But as we’ve also seen, he gave these Scriptures to us as well so that we could live by them in our own times. But we live in a world that is very different from the world of the Old Testament. There’s a large gap between us and the Old Testament that we must take into view as we apply the Old Testament. Listen to 1 Corinthians 10:11 where the apostle Paul summarized the challenge of Christian application of the Old Testament. There he wrote:

> These things happened to them as an example, but they were written down for our instruction, on whom the end of the ages has come (1 Corinthians 10:11).

From the larger context of this passage, we learn that Paul had in mind Old Testament narratives about Israel’s exodus from Egypt and how they applied to the Corinthian Christians. Notice that he highlighted at least three things. First, he spoke of the events in the distant past saying, “These things happened … they were written down.” Second, Paul referred to himself and his fellow Christians at Corinth saying that the stories “were written down for our instruction.” And third, Paul acknowledged that much had happened between the Old Testament days and the Christian age by describing Christ’s followers as those “on whom the end of the ages has come.” Christians live at the end of the ages of history, in the times of the fulfillment of history. The apostle’s words here disclose the challenge of modern application of the Old Testament.

> I love what Paul says in 1 Corinthians 10. So, in 1 Corinthians 10 he’s reflecting on the history of Israel and the fact that this history is written down in the Old Testament Scriptures, and he says to the Corinthians, to largely former pagans, to Gentiles, “These things happened, and they were written down for our instruction.” So, Scripture is authoritative over people, even though, in the first instance those people were not in view, but God had them in view. God is sovereign over the recording of Scripture, and in his mind he can intend, even though it’s written to a different audience initially, he can intend it to be addressed to us. — Dr. Stephen E. Witmer

As Paul’s words suggest, to meet the challenges of applying the Old Testament to our day, we must deal with three things. First, we must understand the ancient world of the Old Testament; second, we must consider the historical developments between us and that ancient world; and third, we must bring what we learn through these developments to our world. Consider first how important it is to pay attention to the ancient world of the Old Testament.
