### Divine Attributes.

In the second place, God is also the same God in his divine attributes — the qualities of his essence.

To be sure, as God engages history he manifests different aspects of his character at different times. For instance, sometimes he displays his mercy; sometimes he displays his wrath. Sometimes he shows his great power; sometimes he restrains himself. But his eternal nature never changes. Listen to the way the author of Hebrews spoke of Christ’s eternal nature in Hebrews 1:10-12:

> You, Lord, laid the foundation of the earth in the beginning, and the heavens are the work of your hands; they will perish, but you remain; they will all wear out like a garment, like a robe you will roll them up, like a garment they will be changed. But you are the same, and your years will have no end (Hebrews 1:10-12).

And in James 1:17 we read this:

> Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of lights, with whom there is no variation or shadow due to change (James 1:17).

As James said here, our God does not change.

Unfortunately, many well-meaning Christians often speak as if God had one set of attributes in the Old Testament and now has a very different set of attributes in the New Testament. I can remember as a six-year-old hearing my teacher comment on Joshua’s battle at Jericho. When she had finished telling us the story, she looked at us all and said, “Boys and girls, God was very mean in the Old Testament. He even wanted children to die back then. But God has changed now. In the New Testament he loves everyone. Aren’t you glad you live in the New Testament times rather than in the Old Testament?” And of course, we were all very glad. None of us wanted to die like the children of Jericho.

Now, as well-meaning as my teacher had been, she had a very serious misunderstanding. God’s attributes did not change between the Old and New Testaments. On the contrary, he is the God of judgment in the Old Testament and in the New Testament. And he is the God of love in the Old Testament and in the New Testament. God’s attributes are eternal. They have always been and always will be unchanging.

The immutability of God’s attributes reveals connections we should expect for all periods of history. God’s attributes have not changed a bit. So, we can be confident that his actions and revelations in Old Testament times, in New Testament times, and in our own day, consistently reflect his eternal nature. He is, and always has been, the same God we worship today.

### Covenant Promises.

In the third place, God is also the same God in his covenant promises. Without fail, God will fulfill everything he has sworn to do in covenant with his people.

Now, we need to be careful here. Many times in Scripture, God threatens and offers things to people which he does not fulfill. But threats and offers are not covenant promises. Covenant promises are those things God has sworn to do, and these covenant oaths are unfailing. As Hebrews 6:17 reads:

> When God desired to show more convincingly to the heirs of the promise the unchangeable character of his purpose, he guaranteed it with an oath (Hebrews 6:17).

This is why God’s covenants play such an important role in this series. The teachings of the entire Old Testament and the teachings of the New Testament hold together because God fulfills his kingdom purposes through a series of major covenants. Each covenant builds on and expands the previous covenants.

First, God made a covenant in the days of Adam, establishing the goals of God’s kingdom and the role of human beings. In the days of Noah, God built on this covenant, assuring the stability of nature. In Abraham’s day, God promised that Israel would increase and would spread God’s blessings to the entire world. In his covenant with Moses, God set his law before the tribes of Israel. In the days of David, he established Israel as a kingdom and emphasized that David's descendant would sit on the throne and reign forever. And finally, God made the new covenant in Christ, reversing the failures of the past and fulfilling his kingdom purposes. Of course, God emphasized different kingdom policies in each of these covenants, as he saw fit in his unfathomable wisdom. But every promise he made in each of these covenants will be fulfilled because his covenant promises are immutable.

We all have to admit that from time to time it appears as if God has forgotten or set aside some of his promises. But the reality is that when we understand Scripture properly — remembering that God has not changed — we find that every covenant promise is or will be fulfilled. God may fulfill his promises in ways that no one ever expected, but he will fulfill them nonetheless. And because God is the same immutable God in the Old Testament that he is today, his covenant promises connect us to the ancient teachings of the Old Testament.

We’ve seen that the Old Testament and our faith today are connected by the fact that we have the same immutable God. Now, we should turn to the second type of connection between the faith of the Old Testament and today’s Christian faith — the fact that we live in the same world.
