## Cultural

As we study the Old Testament, we must take into account the similarities and differences between the cultural patterns presented in the Old Testament and the cultural patterns of our own world. What cultural features of our day closely parallel Abraham’s day? How is our culture like David’s? How has human culture changed from the ancient days of the Old Testament? What customs and traditions are different? We must answer these questions if we’re to make responsible applications of the Old Testament to modern life.

> We live in the 21st century, and we find our culture and the one of the Old Testament, they are different. So, there is need for us to actually dig deep into the biblical culture so that we can understand the text. So, the way we do things is very different from the Old Testament. So, we really need to look at the context and the culture of the Old Testament for us to understand what God is doing in the life of his people in the Old Testament. — Dr. Daniel Simango

Not only must we consider epochal and cultural developments, but to apply the Old Testament in our day, we must also account for personal developments.

## Personal

There are both considerable similarities and considerable differences between the people of the Old Testament and people living in our contemporary world. If we hope to apply the ancient texts of the Old Testament properly, we need to ask questions like: How do our personal lives compare with those that we see in the Old Testament? What roles do we have in society? How do those roles compare to the roles of people in the Old Testament? What is our spiritual condition? How do our thoughts, actions and feelings compare to those that we see in the people of Old Testament times? By taking account of the similarities and differences between ancient Old Testament people and modern people, we can better understand how to apply the Old Testament in our day.
