# Study Guide 
# Old Testament Foundations
# Module Eight – The Patriarch Jacob

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for this course’s final exam.

**********************************

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 – 30:30

Introduction

I. Structure and Content

      A. Beginning of Struggle

      B. End of Struggle

      C. Isaac and Philistines

      D. Jacob and Canaanites

      E. Hostile Separation

      F. Peaceful Separation

      G. Time with Laban


## REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Describe the literary structure of the story of Jacob in Genesis 25:19–37:1.

2. What does the struggle between Jacob and Esau in the womb represent?

3. Of what nation was Esau the father?

4. Of what nation was Jacob the father?

5. What future events were suggested by the fact that Esau was "red" at birth?

6. What important detail is reported in Genesis 35:27-29 that points to the fact that the struggle between Jacob and Esau was over?

7.  In general, what kind of relationship did Isaac have with the Philistines?

8. In general, what kind of relationship did Jacob have with the Canaanites?

9. According to Genesis 27:1–28:5, why did Esau become angry with Jacob?  

10. According to Genesis 32, what experience helped prepare Jacob to meet Esau after years of hostile separation?

11. What new name did the angel give Jacob after wrestling with him?

12. Describe the relationship between Jacob and his father-in-law, Laban.


