# The Primeval History
### Lesson Four
### The Right Direction

## INTRODUCTION
I recall a time when I was teaching in the Ukraine, and had only a few minutes to reach my destination by Metro. I rushed to the station, ran down the stairs and jumped on the train just as the doors were closing. It was going to be a ride all the way across town, so I sat back to catch my breath and relaxed for a few minutes. Then after a while it suddenly dawned on me. I had taken the train going in the wrong direction! Now naturally, the next metro station was miles away, and it took forever to reach it. By the time I got turned around and started back, it was clear that I was going to be very late. I can remember thinking to myself, “Well, this situation isn’t all I had hoped it would be, but at least now I’m going in the right direction.”
I guess that’s the way it is in most areas of life. Our situations are never perfect, and most of the time they’re not even close. We face lots of problems and challenges everywhere we go. Yet, we all know that it is still better at least to be going in the right direction, rather than the wrong way.
We have entitled this lesson “The Right Direction,” and in it we are going to explore Genesis 6:9–11:9 where we will discover the direction God established for his people to follow after the great flood in the days of Noah. As we will see, in these chapters of the primeval history, Moses gave the people of Israel a clear direction to pursue. It may not have been all that they wanted, but it was ordained by God to bring them toward great blessings. And this portion of the primeval history is very important for Christians too, because we should be following this same direction as well.
Our study of Genesis 6:9–11:9 will divide into three parts: first, we will examine the literary structure of these chapters; second, we will explore their original meaning by discerning why Moses wrote this material for Israel; and third, we will look to the New Testament for guidance in applying these chapters to our lives. Let’s begin our study of the right direction by exploring the literary structure of these chapters.

## LITERARY STRUCTURE
Genesis 6:9–11:9 is a large portion of the primeval history, and it may be outlined in a number of different ways. For our purposes, we have segmented these chapters into two main parts. The first section includes 6:9–9:17, and we have entitled it “The Flood of Deliverance.” In this part of Genesis, Moses described the flood of Noah’s day. The second part of this material is Genesis 9:18–11:9, which we have entitled “The New Order.” It describes several crucial events that took place after the flood, and which set enduring patterns that characterized the world after the flood. To gain a better understanding of the literary pattern of these chapters, we will look into both of these major parts. Let’s begin by examining the structure of the story Moses wrote about the flood of Noah’s day.

### FLOOD OF DELIVERANCE
In recent years a number of interpreters have noticed that the story of Noah’s flood displays a relatively clear literary pattern. Although it is possible to describe this pattern in a number of ways, in this study we will point out how these chapters form a symmetrical five-step drama.

#### Initial Covenant
The first step of this narrative appears in Genesis 6:9-22, and we will call it the “initial divine covenant” with Noah. In this portion of the narrative, Moses noted that Noah was a righteous man in a world that had gone sour. God spoke to Noah and revealed why he planned to destroy the human race. We read these words in Genesis 6:13:

>  So God said to Noah, “I am going to put an end to all people, for the earth is filled with violence because of them. I am surely going to destroy both them and the earth” (Genesis 6:13).

Yet, the first step of this narrative also tells us that God planned to start over again by delivering one man and his family, namely, righteous Noah. To assure Noah of his intention, God entered into an initial covenant with Noah. In Genesis 6:17-18, we read that God said these words to Noah:

>  Everything on earth will perish. But I will establish my covenant with you, and you will enter the ark — you and your sons and your wife and your sons’ wives with you (Genesis 6:17-18).

At the beginning of the flood narrative, God swore a covenant oath to rescue Noah and his family from the coming flood. This covenant secured Noah’s deliverance, and established him as the head of a new humanity after the flood.
Now that we have seen how the flood story opens by focusing on God’s initial covenant with Noah, we should turn to the last portion of the story which balances the first, 8:20–9:17, which we have entitled the “enduring divine covenant” with Noah.

#### Enduring Covenant

As our title suggests, in this passage God returned to Noah after the flood and made another covenant with him. God decided to give humanity the opportunity of a new order in the world. As we read in Genesis 8:22:

>  As long as the earth endures, seedtime and harvest, cold and heat, summer and winter, day and night will never cease (Genesis 8:22).

To establish the certainty of this new course, God entered into a second covenant with Noah at the end of the flood narrative in Genesis 9:11-15.

> I establish my covenant with you: Never again will all life be cut off by the waters of a flood; never again will there be a flood to destroy the earth... I have set my rainbow in the clouds, and it will be the sign of the covenant between me and the earth. Whenever I bring clouds over the earth and the rainbow appears in the clouds, I will remember my covenant between me and you and all living creatures of every kind (Genesis 9:11-15).

So we see that the story of Noah’s flood ends with the covenant promise that a flood will never again destroy the earth, and with God setting his bow in the clouds as a sure sign that he would never forget this promise. This closing covenant promise points to the great importance that Noah had in the primeval history. He was the mediator of a covenant, a covenant which extended to all future generations.
With the opening and closing sections of this story in mind, we are in a position to explore the inner workings of the flood narrative. The middle portion moves from God’s initial covenant to the new order of the final covenant in three main steps.

#### Escape from Water

The second step of this narrative appears in 7:1-16, which we have entitled Noah’s “escape from water.” This material is rather straightforward. Noah prepared the ark and brought animals of every kind into it, and floodwaters began to burst into the world, but Noah, his family, and the animals he had gathered were safely sealed in the ark.

#### Exit to Dry Land

The fourth section of the story of Noah’s flood forms a dramatic counterpoint to the second step. It describes Noah’s exit to dry land in Genesis 8:6-19. After the flood had begun to subside, Noah longed for dry land to appear so that he could leave the ark. After a period of waiting, dry lands appeared and God commanded Noah to leave the ark, just as he had previously ordered him to enter it.

#### Divine Remembrance

Now we are in a position to look at the center, or turning point, of this narrative, Genesis 7:17–8:5, which we have entitled the “divine remembrance” of Noah. These verses begin with a description of the flood raging and destroying every living thing on earth. But by the end of this section, the flood has begun to subside.
Now, at the very heart of this section is a simple but profound sentence which indicates why God began to calm the raging flood. In Genesis 8:1 Moses wrote that in the midst of the storm:

>  God remembered Noah and all the wild animals and the livestock that were with him in the ark, and he sent a wind over the earth, and the waters receded (Genesis 8:1).

In great mercy, God did not forget the covenant he made with Noah and those with him. He remembered the passengers of the ark, and moved on their behalf against the raging flood.
This outline of Noah’s flood brings to light the primary concerns of the story. Moses wrote about the flood as a story of deliverance. Although judgment came on the wicked of the earth, Moses’ chief concern was to show that through Noah God brought humanity into a world of tremendous blessings.
Now that we have explored the first portion of Genesis 6:9–11:9, we should turn to the second major section, the new order, in Genesis 9:18–11:9.

### NEW ORDER

Moses’ account of the new order in chapters 9–11 divides into two basic units. On the one hand, Genesis 9:18–10:32 focuses on the sons of Noah. On the other hand, Genesis 11:1-9 concern the defeat of the city of Babel. Although these passages may seem unrelated at first, we will see that they actually work together to create a pattern for the new order of the world. They set forth the central features of world history from that time forward. Let’s look first at the account of the sons of Noah and the contribution it makes to this portrait of the newly ordered world.

#### Sons of Noah

Moses’ record of the sons of Noah in chapters 9–10 of Genesis consists of a title and two main sections. In 9:18-19 we find a title which indicates that this portion of Genesis focuses primarily on Noah’s three sons, and how they were distributed over the earth.
In line with this title, Moses’ record of Noah’s sons divides into two main sections. In the first place, the story in 9:20-29 sets forth distinctions among the sons. And in the second place, 10:1-32 describes the distribution of Noah’s sons and their descendants. It will be helpful to look at these sections separately.
Chapter 9:20-29 is that well-known passage in Genesis that speaks of the curse on Ham’s son Canaan. Listen to what Moses wrote in Genesis 9:24-27:

> When Noah awoke from his wine and found out what his youngest son had done to him, he said, “Cursed be Canaan!” ... He also said, “Blessed be the Lord, the God of Shem! ... May God extend the territory of Japheth” (Genesis 9:24-27).

Put simply, this narrative reports the events that led to a major distinction among the descendants of Noah. Noah cursed Canaan, the son of Ham. Canaan would be the lowest of slaves to his brothers. Yet, Noah pronounced blessings on his other sons Shem and Japheth, because they had treated him with respect.
Moses included this story in his description of the new order after the flood because the entire human race came from the three sons of Noah. The distinctions made here led to the dynamics of human relationships seen from this time forward in biblical history.
This outlook on the distinctions among Noah’s sons is confirmed by chapter 10: the distribution of Noah’s sons. Looking to the generations which came long after the days of Noah, in Genesis 10, Moses gave a sample listing of the places where the descendants of Ham, Shem, and Japheth went throughout the world. According to Genesis 10, the Japhethites occupied territories to the north, northeast, and northwest of Canaan. With a few exceptions, the Hamites moved toward Northern Africa, and the special son of Ham, namely Canaan, dwelled in the land of Canaan, Israel’s Promised Land. The Shemites or Semitic people largely occupied the territories of the Arabian Peninsula.
The record of Genesis 10 is highly selective and designed to provide only general patterns of migration. But these general patterns were enough for Moses to illustrate some long-term patterns that characterized human interaction in the new order after the flood.
Now that we have seen the literary structure of Moses’ attention to Noah’s sons in Genesis 9–10, we are in a position to look at the second portion of the new order after the flood: the defeat of the city of Babel in 11:1-9.

#### Defeat of Babel

The story of the tower of Babel divides into five symmetrical dramatic steps. The first step of verses 1 and 2 begins with the vast majority of humanity together. But by contrast, this narrative ends in verses 8 and 9 where we learn that God dispersed humanity over the earth as he confused human language. Just how did humanity move from being together with one language to being scattered and having many languages? The middle portion explains what happened.
The second step of verses 3 and 4 reports a plan which the people had. They intended to build a city with a great tower reaching to heaven so that they would be famous for all time and utterly invincible. Nevertheless, the fourth step of this narrative in verses 6 and 7 balances this human plan by reporting God’s counter-plan. God called his heavenly army to attack the city by confusing the language of the people and thereby to stop the construction of the city and its tower.

The turning point of this story appears in verse 5, where God investigated the city and its tower. Once God saw the city and the proud plans of its inhabitants, he determined to bring an end to the city of Babel.
So we see that according to Moses, life after the flood was far from the paradise we might have expected. On the contrary, the account of Noah’s sons shows that the new order includes complex interactions among different groups of human beings. It also includes more defiance of God, as well as God’s eventual defeat of those who defy him. Although these structures of the new order may seem strange to our modern ears, we will see that they spoke rather plainly to the experiences of the Israelites to whom Moses first wrote these chapters.
Now that we have seen the literary structure of Genesis 6:9–11:9, we are in a position to ask a second question: Why did Moses write this account of the flood and the resulting new order? What lessons was he teaching the Israelites as they followed him toward the Promised Land?

## ORIGINAL MEANING

Needless to say, we can be sure that Moses wrote about Noah’s flood and the course of the new order to inform Israel of the facts of this period of primeval history. Yet, his record is far too selective and oriented toward particular themes to think that this was all he had in mind. Moses wrote not just to report the past, but to guide Israel in his own day as well.
We will unfold Moses’ purpose by looking at three portions of Genesis 6:9–11:9: first, we will examine the original meaning of the flood narrative; and then we will turn to Moses’ record of Noah’s sons; and finally, we will give attention to the original implications of the last portion of the primeval history — the defeat of Babel. Let’s look first at the ways Moses related the flood of Noah to the experience of Israel in his day.

### FLOOD OF DELIVERANCE

To discern Moses’ use of the flood narrative, we will look at two aspects of the story: first, the connections he established between the flood and the exodus; and second, the implications of these connections for Israel. Moses established connections between the flood and his own day by portraying Noah in ways that closely resembled his own life and ministry. Now, to be sure, the lives of Noah and Moses were different in many ways, and these differences should not be ignored. Yet, it is also evident that Moses purposefully depicted Noah so that his Israelite readers would see Noah as a precursor or foreshadowing of Moses.
