# The Pentateuch 
### Lesson Ten Joseph and His Brothers

## INTRODUCTION
 
Siblings in families with large estates often struggle with each other over who will receive the largest inheritance. When it comes time for the estate to be passed from one generation to the next, even brothers and sisters who once loved each other dearly can become so divided that only God can re-establish the bonds of love. The book of Genesis teaches us that this is how it was for the family of Israel’s patriarchs, Joseph and his
brothers. Their rivalry over the inheritance of their father, Jacob, became so bitter that it seemed impossible to resolve. But as we’ll see in this lesson, God reconciled Joseph and his brothers and re-established their bonds of love. This resolution charted a course for the relationships amongst the twelve tribes of Israel throughout the Old Testament. And it still directs relationships among Christ’s followers today.
This lesson on the Pentateuch is devoted to the portion of the book of Genesis that deals with “Joseph and His Brothers.” We’ll look in some detail at Genesis 37:2– 50:26, the story of Joseph’s troubled relationship with his siblings.
Before we turn to our main topic, it will help to review the basic content of the book of Genesis. In other lessons, we’ve seen that Genesis divides into three main parts. Each part was designed to address Moses’ original Israelite audience in particular ways. The first part deals with the primeval history, found in Genesis 1:1–11:9. In this section, Moses showed the Israelites that their call to the land of Canaan was established in what God had done in the earliest periods of world history. The second part records the earlier patriarchal history in Genesis 11:10–37:1. Here, Moses addressed how the lives of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob spoke to issues faced by the Israelites on their way to the Promised Land. And the third part, the later patriarchal history, in Genesis 37:2–50:26, tells the story of Joseph and his brothers. Our lesson will focus on this last section of Genesis.
As we’ll see, Moses’ purpose in this part of Genesis involved a number of lessons for his original audience. But in general:
The story of Joseph and his brothers taught the tribes of Israel how to live together in harmony as they faced the conquest and settlement of the Promised Land.
Our lesson on Joseph and his brothers will divide into two main parts. First, we’ll examine the structure and content of these chapters, how their literary design and subject matter go hand in hand. Second, we’ll look at a number of major themes Moses emphasized for the tribes of Israel and how these themes apply to modern Christians. Let’s begin by looking at the structure and content of this part of Genesis.

## STRUCTURE AND CONTENT
 
Everyone familiar with the story of Joseph and his brothers knows that it involves many characters, different cultural settings and a number of intricate subplots. These features are so complex that it’s easy to become preoccupied with the details and lose sight of the overarching literary structure that holds it all together. But paying attention to how the structure and content of these chapters work together is especially important because the account of Joseph and his brothers is a highly unified drama.
Moses’ presentation of Genesis 37:2–50:26 forms a highly integrated, five-step drama:
* The initial problem of the story, in Genesis 37:2-36, depicts patriarchal disharmony over the prospect of Joseph’s rule.
* The second step, or rising action, in 38:1–41:57 focuses on Joseph’s threatening rule — his rise to power in Egypt.
* The third step, in 42:1–47:12, is the turning point of the drama. It deals with the patriarchs’ reconciliation and reunion in Egypt.
* The fourth step, or falling action, in 47:13-27 reports Joseph’s benevolent rule in Egypt.
* And the final resolution of the drama, in 47:28–50:26, describes patriarchal harmony under Joseph’s rule.

In recent decades, a number of interpreters have attempted to show that these chapters in Genesis form an extensive concentric chiasm. A chiasm is:

A literary structure in which sections before and after a centerpiece parallel or balance each other.

Most of these attempts press this outlook too far. But they do point toward a large-scale dramatic symmetry that brings coherence to the entire record of Joseph and his brothers.
It isn’t difficult to see that, in general, the account begins with patriarchal disharmony, and ends with patriarchal harmony in the final resolution of the drama.
The rising action of Joseph’s threatening rule in Egypt balances with the falling action of Joseph’s benevolent rule in Egypt. And the turning point, or hinge — the transition from disharmony and threat to benevolence and harmony — is the reconciliation and reunion that takes place in Egypt. We’ll look at these episodes in the order Moses presented them. But understanding this basic dramatic symmetry will help us as we examine a number of details in the story of Joseph and his brothers.
The content of the story of Joseph and his brothers displays more literary complexity than any other portion of Genesis. It has a long roster of characters and portrays many of them as three-dimensional, changing characters. Scenes are depicted vividly. Irony, humor, and tragedy appear throughout. The narrative contains many unexpected turns of events that recollect and anticipate other events. As such, this part of Genesis would have called the original Israelite audience to consider far more than we can possibly explore in this lesson. So, for the sake of time, we’ll limit ourselves to just a few comments on the content of each chapter.

### PATRIARCHAL DISHARMONY (GENESIS 37:2-36)

Moses began his narrative in Genesis 37:2-36 with the initial dramatic problem of patriarchal disharmony over Joseph’s future rule. This opening chapter consists of two parts that together show how disharmony in Joseph’s family worsened over time. The first part, in 37:2-11, illustrates how Joseph increasingly agitated his brothers. And the second part, in verses 12-36, tells of how the brothers sold Joseph into slavery. Let’s look at the way Joseph agitated his brothers.

#### Joseph Agitated Brothers

Moses first portrayed Joseph as a naïve young man who was favored by his father. For example, in verse 3, Jacob gave Joseph an ornate robe that drove his brothers to jealousy. Verse 4 tells us “they hated him and could not speak a kind word to him.” Then, to make matters worse, in two additional vignettes, Joseph boasted about his dreams of future exaltation over his family. Because of this, in both verse 5 and verse 8, Moses wrote that Joseph’s brothers “hated him all the more.” And verse 11 tells us, “His brothers were jealous of him.”

> The causes of disharmony between Joseph and his brothers... I can pick two. One is that his father made him the most beautiful robe, and that robe, the other brothers looked at it and said, “My, I think I need to have that. It needs to be mine.” And when we look at ourselves, we have disharmony even in this society because some people are living better lives and we see disharmony in others asking themselves, “Why am I not like this other person?” Even in church we have it. We look at somebody that is sickly and others are healthy, and we ask ourselves, “Why are we not healthy?” So, the giving of the best to Joseph when these others didn’t have, caused some disharmony. Number two: the brokenness of human nature. The brothers were envious, and because his brother had a better, you know, gown than them, was more beautiful than theirs, they became envious. And we find the seed of envy in all of us. It was not only those brothers, but it’s all in us. But as Christians we are called to identify it first and know that’s it’s a sin of envy and we can put a stop to it.   — Rev. Dr. Cyprian K. Guchienda

After presenting the patriarchal disharmony that resulted when Joseph agitated his brothers, Moses turned to the second part of 37:12-36. These verses contain a short narrative explaining how the brothers sold Joseph into slavery.

#### Brothers Sold Joseph
Here we see that the brothers captured Joseph, stripped him of his ornate robe, and planned to kill him. The eldest brother, Reuben, tried in vain to help Joseph escape. But in the end, it was Judah who convinced the others that they should sell Joseph into slavery rather than kill him. This episode ends with the brothers’ tragic, deceitful report to Jacob that Joseph had been devoured by a wild animal. The brothers presented Jacob with Joseph’s blood-stained robe, and Jacob fell into severe mourning.
Together, these two episodes introduce the dramatic problem that sets the course for the entire story of Joseph and his brothers. This was the beginning of the tragic disharmony among Israel’s tribal patriarchs.
After the initiating problem of patriarchal disharmony over Joseph’s future rule,
Moses moved to the second step. In 38:1–41:57, Moses told of the rise of Joseph’s threatening rule.

### JOSEPH’S THREATENING RULE (GENESIS 38:1–41:57)

In this step, Moses employed dramatic irony by giving his audience insights that characters in the story didn’t have. First, Joseph’s brothers — represented here by Judah — lived in Canaan, apparently confident that they had stopped Joseph from gaining superiority over them. But, unknown to the other characters, Joseph’s rule far away in Egypt was increasing. God had turned Joseph’s slavery into a path toward exaltation over his family.
The focus on Joseph’s threatening rule divides into two main sections. In the first place, 38:1-30 describes Judah’s sin against Tamar in Canaan. Then, in 39:1–41:57, we learn of Joseph’s success in Egypt. Let’s look at Judah’s sin in Canaan.

#### Judah’s Sin in Canaan (Genesis 38:1-30)

Judah moved to center stage in this chapter because he, rather than Reuben, kept his brothers from killing Joseph in the preceding episode. So, this section represents the actions of Jacob’s son who had the highest standing among his brothers. The episode of Judah’s sin in Canaan begins in 38:1-5 with birth reports of Judah’s sons. The moral tone is set in verse 2 when we learn that Judah married a Canaanite woman.
In verses 6-11 we find an account of Judah’s sons and Tamar. First, Judah gave
Tamar to his eldest son, Er. When Er died, Judah gave Tamar to his second son, Onan. The practice of levirate marriage, or marriage by the brother-in-law of a childless widow, was commanded in Deuteronomy 25:5-10. This practice insured an heir for the brother who had died, and protected his widow. But in verse 9, Onan refused to give Tamar a child. So, in verse 10, God took Onan’s life as well. Judah feared that his third son, young Shelah, might face the same fate. So, he refused to allow him to marry Tamar. Instead, he sent Tamar back to her father in shame. 
In verses 12-26 we find the account of Tamar’s seduction of Judah. When Tamar realized that she was not going to be married to Shelah, she disguised herself as a prostitute and seduced Judah. She cleverly tricked Judah by keeping his seal and its cord and a staff he had given her in lieu of payment. Three months later, in verses 24-26, Judah heard that Tamar was pregnant and indignantly ordered her execution. But Tamar produced the seal, cord and staff that Judah had given her. And when Judah realized what he had done, he admitted his guilt. Listen to Genesis 38:26 where Judah said:

>  She is more righteous than I, since I wouldn’t give her to my son Shelah (Genesis 38:26).

As this verse indicates, the patriarch Judah admitted that his sin was much worse
than anything Tamar had done. And he was exemplary in his humble confession and repentance. As a result of this change of heart, the story of Judah’s sin against Tamar has a positive ending. In contrast with the opening segment about Judah’s sons by a Canaanite woman, Moses closed this section, in verses 27-30, with a birth report of Judah’s sons by Tamar. Both Perez and Zerah became prominent names in the tribe of Judah.
With the events of Judah’s sin in Canaan in mind, let’s turn to the second section associated with Joseph’s threatening rule. This section, found in Genesis 39:1–41:57, is a lengthy account of Joseph’s success in Egypt.

#### Joseph’s Success in Egypt (Genesis 39:1–41:57)

This section divides into three main segments. The first segment reports Joseph’s move from Potiphar’s house to prison in 39:1-23. After Joseph arrived in Egypt, he quickly received favor from Potiphar and ruled over his household. But Potiphar’s wife attempted to seduce Joseph. When she failed, she accused Joseph of misconduct. Although Joseph resisted her advances, Potiphar believed his wife’s false accusations. He sent Joseph to Pharaoh’s prison, where Joseph quickly won the confidence of the jailor. Because this episode follows the narrative of Judah’s sin with Tamar, it clearly contrasts Judah’s earlier immorality with Joseph’s moral purity.

> When I read the story about Judah and Tamar, I almost feel like I should do a little bit of cutting and pasting, taking the story and placing it somewhere else. And yet, when you actually read the
context, you realize exactly why God would have put that story after he’d already started the Joseph story. I think he does that because he wants to show the contrast between an unrighteous man and a righteous man. Joseph is willing to resist the sexual temptation of Potiphar’s wife. Judah actually willingly engages in prostitution, perhaps even religious shrine prostitution. And so you see that contrast, and the fact is that God is going to bless Joseph with the double portion of the firstborn, although he is not the firstborn, but he’s the one who leads his family in a righteous way. — Dr. Stephen J. Bramer

Second, in 40:1–41:45, Joseph moved from prison to Pharaoh’s court. In this segment, Moses explained how Joseph rose to power by interpreting the dreams of Pharaoh’s officials. Then later, he interpreted Pharaoh’s dreams concerning seven years of plenty and seven years of famine.
In the third segment, 41:46-57, Moses summarized Joseph’s rule in Pharaoh’s court. In this segment, Moses reported several ways Joseph exercised authority in Egypt, second only to Pharaoh himself. In each segment of Joseph’s success, Moses made it
clear that Joseph rose to power, not by his own ingenuity, but by the hand of God. Now that we’ve explored the patriarchal disharmony over Joseph’s future rule,
and Joseph’s threatening rule in Egypt, we should move to the central turning point of the story: the patriarchs’ reconciliation and reunion in Egypt, recorded in Genesis 42:1– 47:12.

### RECONCILIATION AND REUNION (GENESIS 42:1–47:12)

This central narrative of reconciliation and reunion consists of three closely connected journeys taken by Joseph’s family from Canaan to Egypt. The first journey is in Genesis 42:1-38. The second journey is found in 43:1–45:28. And the third journey can be seen in 46:1–47:12. Let’s take a look at the first journey.

#### First Journey (Genesis 42:1-38)

The first journey is the simplest of the three accounts and can be divided into three sections. First, in 42:1-5, the brothers traveled from Canaan to Egypt because of the great famine. In this section, Jacob sent all of Joseph’s brothers, except Benjamin, to purchase food in Egypt.
The second section, in 42:6-28, deals with events in Egypt when Joseph first recognized his brothers. Joseph didn’t reveal his identity, but tested the character of his brothers by sending them back to Canaan to retrieve Benjamin. At first, Joseph threatened to hold all but one of them in prison until Benjamin arrived in Egypt. As a
result, the brothers began to realize that their time of reckoning had come. In 42:21 they said to each other: “Surely we are being punished because of our brother.” Three days later, Joseph sent all but Simeon back to retrieve Benjamin. He ordered that their bags be filled with grain and with the silver they had brought to purchase the grain. As the brothers traveled back, one of them discovered the silver in his bag. The brothers were afraid and exclaimed in verse 28, “What is this that God has done to us?”
 The third section, in verses 29-38, reports what happened when the brothers returned to Canaan. They tried to persuade their father to send Benjamin back with them to Egypt, but Jacob refused. So, the brothers remained in Canaan.
 
#### Second Journey (Genesis 43:1–45:28)

Having looked briefly at the first journey, let’s turn to the events of the second journey in Genesis 43:1–45:28. Although somewhat more complex than the first journey, the second journey also divides into three main segments. The first segment, in 43:1-14, precedes the brothers’ travel to Egypt. After their supply of food was gone, Jacob finally agreed to send Benjamin along with his brothers back to Egypt.
The second segment, in 43:15–45:24, consists of lengthy depictions of events in Egypt. First, in 43:15-34, Joseph welcomed his brothers to a great feast at his house. But, he continued to keep his identity a secret. According to 43:30, Joseph was so moved at the sight of Benjamin that he left the room to weep in private.
In 44:1-13, Joseph further tested his brothers. He ordered his steward to fill their sacks with grain and silver and to place a silver cup in Benjamin’s sack. Then Joseph sent his brothers back to Canaan. But at Joseph’s behest, the steward caught up with the brothers. He “found” the silver cup in Benjamin’s sack, and brought the brothers back to Joseph’s house.
In verses 14-34, Judah pled for mercy from Joseph and admitted in verse 16: “God has uncovered your servants’ guilt.” Judah then selflessly offered to stay in Egypt himself in the place of Benjamin. Joseph was moved by Judah’s humble plea. And in 45:1-15, Joseph finally revealed his identity to his brothers. Chapter 45:2 tells us, “[Joseph] wept so loudly that the Egyptians heard him, and Pharaoh’s household heard about it.” Joseph explained in verse 7 that God had sent him to Egypt “to preserve for you a remnant on earth and to save your lives by a great deliverance.” He then ordered his brothers to bring their father, Jacob, to Egypt. This scene closes in verses 14-15 with a touching scene of Joseph and Benjamin weeping as they embraced each other and with Joseph kissing and talking with all of his brothers. 

> The middle section of the story of Joseph is about the reconciliation between Joseph and his brothers. He’s already gone to Egypt, struggles have come up, Joseph’s brothers come seeking food and relief from the famine, but in the middle of that, in chapter 45 especially, we have this magnificent image — it’s magnificent, actually
— it’s one of the most dramatic and emotional sections of the whole book of Genesis, and that is when Joseph and his brothers finally reconcile. And what you find is that they’re hugging each other and they’re weeping and weeping and weeping. They weep so much in that chapter and the one just slightly before that, that even the Egyptians are wondering why all the crying is going on. And so, it’s a lovely picture because there has been such disharmony among the brothers, but at that moment they are completely unified. And that unification comes from the fact, first, that Joseph had tested his brothers and found out that they were changed people. They were not like they were in the beginning when they sought his life, when they deceived their father and those kinds of things. They were changed people, and certain ones of them, like Judah, stand out in particular as changed people... The reconciliation comes from the fact that these brothers have been changed and that Joseph has been changed. He’s changed from this brash young man who was very prideful about his dreams and those sorts of things to one who now has mercy from a position of power. And as you see those changes taking place in those chapters, or recognize in those chapters, this scene of them crying and holding onto each other is very precious and would have obviously stuck in
the minds of Israelites in the days of Moses. — Dr. Richard L. Pratt, Jr.

Then, in 45:16-24, Pharaoh ordered Joseph to send his brothers to retrieve Jacob. And Pharaoh promised Joseph in verse 20: “the best of all Egypt will be yours.” Joseph complied and directed his brothers to continue in their newly found harmony. In verse 24 Joseph instructed them, “don’t quarrel on the way!”
In the final segment of the second journey, in 45:25-28, the brothers returned to Canaan. They told Jacob what had happened in Egypt, and Jacob agreed to return to Egypt with them.
After looking at the patriarchs’ reconciliation and reunion in the first journey and the second journey, we come to the third journey in Genesis 46:1–47:12.

#### Third Journey (Genesis 46:1–47:12)

The third journey divides into two main segments. First, 46:1-27 reports the brothers’ travel to Egypt again, but this time with Jacob. In verses 1-7, we learn the travel itinerary and God’s reassurance that Jacob would be blessed in Egypt. The travel sequence then closes, in 46:8-27, with a list of Jacob’s sons and grandsons who went to Egypt.
Second, just as in the first and second journeys, 46:28–47:12 provides a segment on events in Egypt. Chapter 46:28-30 deals with Jacob’s reunion with Joseph in which Judah played a leading role. And following this, in 46:31–47:12, Pharaoh welcomed
Joseph’s family and ordered them to live in Goshen under Joseph’s care.
After writing of the patriarchs’ reconciliation and reunion, Moses then turned to
the fourth step, or falling action, in his story. In Genesis 47:13-27, Moses told of Joseph’s benevolent rule in Egypt.
