### JOSEPH’S BENEVOLENT RULE (GENESIS 47:13-27)

In 47:13-26, we learn that the famine worsened over time. Joseph made food available throughout Egypt and Canaan. And he consolidated Pharaoh’s power by purchasing the livestock and land of the people of Egypt and Canaan in order to feed them. In the process, he saved countless lives.
At the end of this account, in Genesis 47:27, Moses commented on how Joseph’s rule benefitted Jacob and his sons. Moses wrote:

>  Now the Israelites settled in Egypt in the region of Goshen. They acquired property there and were fruitful and increased greatly in number (Genesis 47:27).

Following the initial patriarchal disharmony, the rise of Joseph’s threatening rule, the reconciliation and reunion of the brothers, and Joseph’s benevolent rule in Egypt, we come to the last step of Moses’ record of Joseph and his brothers. In Genesis 47:28– 50:26, Joseph’s family experienced patriarchal harmony under Joseph’s rule.

### PATRIARCHAL HARMONY (GENESIS 47:28–50:26)

This last step resolves the opening problem of disharmony among the patriarchs. And by focusing on the harmony of Joseph’s family, it establishes blessings to Israel that were particularly important to Moses’ first audience.
The chapters on patriarchal harmony divide into two main sections. In the first place, in Genesis 47:28–50:14, Moses drew attention to Jacob’s enduring familial arrangements established in his last days. Then, in Genesis 50:15-26, we see Joseph’s enduring familial arrangements. Let’s look first at Jacob’s familial arrangements.

#### Jacob’s Familial Arrangements (Genesis 47:28–50:14)

This section begins with Jacob near the time of his death. In 47:28-31, Moses explained that Jacob required Joseph’s oath to bury him in Canaan. Then, in 48:1–49:28, we read of two separate meetings involving Jacob’s blessings.
In the first meeting, in 48:1-22, Jacob privately blessed Joseph and his sons, Ephraim and Manasseh. Here, Joseph received the honor of a double inheritance,
normally given to the firstborn, because Jacob determined to treat Ephraim and Manasseh as equal to their uncles. But unexpectedly, Jacob gave Ephraim, Joseph’s second son, prominence over Manasseh, the firstborn.
Then in 49:1-28, after exalting Joseph and his sons privately, all of Jacob’s sons received his final blessings. Jacob gathered all of his sons together, and one by one the patriarch blessed them in ways that were appropriate for how they had lived. As Jacob’s final blessings, these arrangements were intended to endure for generations to come.
This section closes in Genesis 49:29–50:14, where we learn of Jacob’s death and burial. In these verses, Joseph fulfilled his father’s wishes to be buried in Canaan. Then he returned to Egypt.
The patriarchal harmony under Joseph’s rule not only includes a section on Jacob’s familial arrangements; it also incorporates Joseph’s familial arrangements in Genesis 50:15-26.

#### Joseph’s Familial Arrangements (Genesis 50:15-26)

This brief section divides into two short reports. In 50:15-21, Joseph reassured his brothers of his kindness toward them. Joseph’s brothers appealed to him for forgiveness,
and Joseph graciously forgave.

> One of the things that we see in the story of Joseph and his brothers is the power of forgiveness, the power of trusting in God's good purposes for us even when circumstances are extremely difficult for us, and we can see those who aren’t in the same difficult circumstance. We might even be able accurately to say, “They put me in this circumstance.” But Joseph’s response to his brothers, essentially selling him into slavery, we discover, is trust and obedience toward the Lord and a fulfillment of a unique and important purpose that God had destined him for. — Rev. Dr. Michael Walker

In Genesis 50:19-21 Joseph told his brothers:

> Don’t be afraid. Am I in the place of God? You intended to harm me, but God intended it for good to accomplish what is now being done, the saving of many lives. So then, don’t be afraid. I will provide for you and your children (Genesis 50:19-21).

 The entire story of Joseph and his brothers closes in Genesis 50:22-26 with an oath Joseph required from his brothers. Listen to Genesis 50:25:
 
> Joseph made the sons of Israel swear an oath and said, “God will surely come to your aid, and then you must carry my bones up from this place” (Genesis 50:25).

In the record of Genesis, this oath was Joseph’s last interaction with his brothers before he died. Joseph’s brothers promised on behalf of their descendants that when God delivered Israel from Egypt, they would continue to honor Joseph by taking his bones with them for burial in the Promised Land.

> Joseph’s last words are these: “God will surely take care of you” — speaking to his brothers and his family basically — “and you shall carry my bones up from here.” As an Egyptian ruler, it’s very likely that once Joseph died he was embalmed, placed in a sarcophagus... Each time they would see this sarcophagus, they would think of the promise that was given by Joseph and by the promise that was given to the patriarchs that you will return to the land. Joseph said “Carry my bones with you; put them in the Promised Land with you.” That’s part of him accepting the promise of God... And so, when the Jews left Egypt, Moses took with them the bones of Joseph. Again, in those forty years it became a symbol, a visual aid, of the great promise that was given by God for the people of Israel to be in a promised land. So the bones then were finally buried at Shechem, and the principle here, I think, is very simple: the promises of God must be more real than anything else in life. God keeps his promises. — Dr. Larry J. Waters

Up to this point in our lesson on Joseph and his brothers, we’ve looked at the structure and content of Moses’ account. Now, we should turn to the second main topic of our lesson, the major themes of these chapters.

## MAJOR THEMES
 
The story of Joseph and his brothers had many implications for the original audience of Genesis, far more than we can mention here. And the same is true for modern application. Still, if we look at these chapters within the setting of the original audience, certain themes move to the foreground. These major themes don’t cover all the ways Joseph’s story was designed to impact its original audience. Nor do they represent all of the ways we should apply them today. But these major themes give us an orientation toward some of the most crucial features of this part of Genesis.
We’ll look at some of the major themes of these chapters in two ways. First, we’ll make a few comments on how we may approach some shared emphases that appear in both Joseph’s story and in the records of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. And second, we’ll look more carefully at two special emphases that are highlighted in the story of Joseph and his brothers. Let’s look first at a number of shared emphases.

### SHARED EMPHASES

As we’ve seen in other lessons on Genesis, four main themes appear in the narratives concerning the lives of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. These topics appear in the story of Joseph and his brothers as well: an emphasis on God’s grace to Israel, the  requirement of Israel’s loyalty to God, God’s blessings to Israel, and God’s blessings through Israel to others. Let’s reflect for a moment on how to approach the theme of God’s grace to Israel in this part of the Bible.

#### God’s Grace to Israel
Scripture uses specific terms for divine grace, mercy, and kindness, but we rarely see these terms in Joseph’s story. Nevertheless, we find the theme of God’s grace throughout these chapters. In what we’ll call “that world” of Joseph’s day, God occasionally reminded Joseph and his family of his past grace, grace he had shown before their time. God also displayed his ongoing grace to Joseph and his family at every turn.
And when God pointed to events in the future, he often indicated how Joseph and his family would one day receive his future grace, especially the grace of returning to the Promised Land.
But these three types of grace didn’t shape just Joseph’s story. Moses’ wrote of God’s grace in Joseph’s world so his original audience could reflect on the many ways God had shown them grace in “their world.”
In much the same way, as followers of Christ, we can apply the grace God showed Joseph and his family to our world as well. There are many ways to do this, but it’s often helpful to think in terms of the three stages of Christ’s kingdom. From our New Testament perspective, God’s past grace shown to Joseph and his brothers applies to us as it was displayed in Christ’s first advent, in the inauguration of his kingdom. Every time we see God’s ongoing grace in the story of Joseph, we’re reminded of his ongoing grace in our daily lives throughout the continuation of Christ’s kingdom. And just like Joseph and his family expected God’s future grace, we may hope in God’s mercies at the consummation of Christ’s kingdom in the new heavens and new earth.
Along with the shared emphasis of God’s grace to Israel, let’s look at the requirement of Israel’s loyalty to God.

#### Israel’s Loyalty to God

One of the most unusual features of Moses’ narrative of that world of Joseph and his brothers is that Moses never cited verbal instructions or commands from God. Instead, Moses expected the Israelites to evaluate Joseph’s loyalty to God in that world in light of the law they’d received in their world.
Now, of course, Moses knew that the patriarchs couldn’t earn their salvation through loyalty to God’s law. That’s always been impossible. But their obedience and disobedience displayed the true condition of their hearts in each step of the story. And Moses called his audience to examine their own hearts in light of Joseph’s story.
For instance, on the negative side, Moses didn’t have to speak directly of God’s disapproval of the brothers’ plan to kill Joseph. His audience already knew that this broke the sixth commandment against murder in Exodus 20:13. Selling Joseph into slavery violated laws like Deuteronomy 24:7. The brothers broke the commandment in Exodus 20:12 to honor father and mother when they deceived Jacob. When Judah slept with Tamar, thinking she was a prostitute, he violated commandments against sexual immorality in Exodus 20:14 and other laws like Leviticus 19:29.
But on the more positive side, Moses also relied on his audience’s knowledge of God’s law to identify when Joseph and his brothers were loyal to God. For instance, Joseph conformed to the seventh and tenth commandments in Exodus 20:14 and 17 when he exhibited sexual morality by resisting the seduction of Potiphar’s wife. Later on, in passages like Genesis 46:29-34, Joseph and his brothers honored their father in accordance with the fifth commandment in Exodus 20:12. The brothers’ repentance and humility before Joseph reflected laws like Leviticus 5:5. Joseph’s kindness and mercy toward his brothers was true to passages like Leviticus 19:18. So, we can see that, as Moses described disloyalty and loyalty in that world, he called attention to the disloyalty
and loyalty of his original Israelite audience in their world.
As modern Christians, there are at least three main ways we should deal with
loyalty and disloyalty to God in the story of Joseph. First, we should compare and contrast these examples with Jesus’ perfect obedience to God, especially in the inauguration of his kingdom. Second, we should be ready to apply the moral principles of the story of Joseph to our daily lives during the continuation of Christ’s kingdom. And finally, the requirement of loyalty in the story of Joseph should draw our attention to what will happen at the return of Christ in the consummation of his kingdom. At that time, all who’ve exercised saving faith in Christ will be fully vindicated and transformed into perfectly obedient servants of God in the new heavens and new earth.
We’ve looked at the shared emphases of God’s grace to Israel and Israel’s loyalty to God. The third emphasis shared by both Joseph’s story and the earlier patriarchal history is the theme of God’s blessings to Israel.

#### God’s Blessings to Israel

In terms of "that world" of Joseph and his brothers, we should mention that God poured out his blessings sometimes in spite of the disloyalty of the patriarchs and at other times in response to their loyalty. Moses designed the theme of God’s blessings to his people in that world to make his original audience aware of the countless ways God had blessed them in their world — both in spite of their disloyalty and also in response to their loyalty.
In much the same way, God’s blessings in the story of Joseph and his brothers apply to our world today. Sometimes this is in spite of our disloyalty and at other times in
response to our loyalty. We find connections between Joseph’s story and our lives by acknowledging the blessings God poured out on his people in the inauguration of Christ’s kingdom. We also recognize how he blesses us now in the continuation of Christ’s kingdom. And we look forward to how God will bless us at the consummation of Christ’s kingdom.
Along with the shared emphases of God’s grace to Israel, Israel’s loyalty to God, and God’s blessings to Israel, the story of Joseph also shares an emphasis on God’s blessings through Israel to others.

#### God’s Blessings through Israel

Passages like Genesis 12:3, 22:18, and 26:4 tell us that God blessed Israel and ordained Abraham and his descendants to spread his kingdom and its blessings to all nations. This theme appears in that world of Joseph primarily in the ways Joseph’s rule in Egypt led to blessings for others. For example, Joseph was a blessing to Potiphar in Genesis 39:5. He was a blessing to the jailor in Pharaoh’s prison in 39:22. And Joseph blessed Pharaoh when he interpreted Pharaoh’s dream in 41:25. But the greatest blessings to others came at the height of Joseph’s power when he blessed the Egyptians and many nations. As Genesis 41:56-57 reports:

> When the famine had spread over the whole country, Joseph opened the storehouses and sold grain to the Egyptians ... And all the countries came to Egypt to buy grain from Joseph, because the famine was severe in all the world (Genesis 41:56-57).

It’s easy to see how the theme of Israel’s blessings to others applied to “their world” of Moses’ original audience. First, in hearing Joseph’s story, the Israelites would have been encouraged to know that their patriarchs had blessed others already. They also would have realized that God had called them to bring God’s blessings to others in their own day. And they would have looked forward to the future when their descendants would spread God’s blessings to the entire world.
As you might expect, this theme also applies to us in our world. Christ granted blessings to the world in the inauguration of his kingdom. He blesses the world through the church during the continuation of his kingdom. And one day, he will bless every tribe and nation of the world at the consummation of his kingdom in the new creation.

### SPECIAL EMPHASES

As we’ve explored the major themes in the story of Joseph, we’ve mentioned some of the shared emphases between Joseph’s story and the rest of the patriarchal history in Genesis. Now we should focus on two special emphases found distinctly in Joseph’s story. Earlier in this lesson we proposed that:

The story of Joseph and his brothers taught the tribes of Israel how to live together in harmony as they faced the conquest and settlement of the Promised Land.

As we’ve seen, much of this part of Genesis has to do with the disharmony and harmony between Joseph and his brothers. And Joseph and his brothers were the fathers of the twelve tribes of Israel. So, these interactions were connected directly with the interactions among the tribes of Israel in Moses’ day. Listen to Joseph’s last words in Genesis 50:24-25 where this connection moves to the foreground:

> Joseph said to his brothers, “I am about to die. But God will surely come to your aid and take you up out of this land to the land he promised on oath to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.” And Joseph made the sons of Israel swear an oath and said, “God will surely come to your aid, and then you must carry my bones up from this place” (Genesis 50:24-25).

It would be difficult to overemphasize the connection that this passage made between that world, of Joseph’s day, and their world, of Moses’ original audience. Moses closed the story of Joseph and his brothers with Joseph’s explicit anticipation of what was happening in the lives of the original audience of Genesis — their entry into the Promised Land.
There are many ways to sum up the implications of this connection between Joseph’s last words and the experiences of the original audience. But for our purposes, we’ll look at just two special emphases. First, we’ll see how the story of Joseph and his brothers was designed to promote national unity among the tribes of Israel in Moses’ day. And second, we’ll see how his words acknowledged the national diversity God had ordained among the tribes of Israel. Let’s look first at the theme of national unity.

#### National Unity

To see the importance of the theme of national unity, we need to point out that the story of Joseph and his family departs from a pattern that appears time and again in Genesis. We may call this pattern “exclusive succession.” By exclusive succession we mean the passing of God’s special favor over time through one main figure or patriarch.
Think about it this way: In the primeval history of Genesis 1:1–11:9, God first ordained that Adam and his descendants would fill and rule over the whole world. They were to spread God’s glorious kingdom throughout the earth. But with the introduction of sin, this promise passed exclusively to Seth and not to Cain. God’s special favor then passed through the line of Seth’s descendants until God confirmed his covenant exclusively with Noah. Noah had three sons, Shem, Ham and Japheth. But God’s promises were passed down exclusively through Shem’s lineage. And at the end of the primeval history, Shem’s descendant, Abraham, was the exclusive heir of God’s promises.
The earlier patriarchal history in Genesis 11:10–37:1 continues this pattern of exclusive succession. Abraham’s promises were passed only to Isaac instead of Ishmael
and Abraham’s other sons. And God’s promises to Isaac were passed down exclusively to Jacob instead of Esau.
Now, as vital as this pattern of exclusive succession was in the first 36 chapters of Genesis, it comes to an abrupt end with the story of Joseph and his brothers. In this part of Genesis, Moses stressed “inclusive succession.” He believed that the special favor of God passed from Jacob to all twelve of his sons, not to just one. When Jacob died, all twelve of his sons and their descendants, the twelve tribes of Israel, shared jointly in  Jacob’s inheritance of the Promised Land. And this inclusive distribution of Jacob’s inheritance to all of his sons called Moses’ Israelite audience to national unity.

> As we read through the story of Jacob and then Joseph and his brother Judah, we realize there’s a lot of turmoil in this family, a lot of conflict, jealousy, strife, and God does not want his covenant community to be living this way. And so the story becomes a paradigm, I think, for how God is working in the covenant community to bring about unity, as Joseph and Judah end up unified, not in conflict anymore. This is a good example for the people later. Joseph and Judah are two of the major tribes in Israel. It becomes a great example for them of the kind of unity that God wants to see in the covenant community and is trying to produce. — Dr. Robert B. Chisholm, Jr.

As we saw earlier, the story of Joseph and his brothers began with disharmony caused by the brothers’ sins against each other. But it ended with harmony among the brothers. In this way, Moses’ narrative made it clear to everyone following him that God had called the tribes of Israel to seek national unity. As Joseph’s story illustrated, all Israel shared together in the inheritance of the Promised Land that God had given to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.
It’s no wonder, then, that Moses addressed unity among the tribes of Israel in other places. For instance, in Exodus 19:8, he stressed that all of the Israelites agreed unanimously to enter into covenant with God at Mount Sinai. In Numbers 32 and Joshua 1:12-18, both Moses and Joshua insisted that the tribes should fight together in the land of Canaan before any of them separated from each other. Moses also gathered all of the tribes together for covenant renewal in Deuteronomy 29:2.
And beyond this, Israel’s national unity continued to be emphasized by later Old Testament authors. Despite the failures of David and Solomon, the period of the united monarchy was considered Israel’s golden age. The division of the nation into the northern and southern kingdoms fell far short of God’s ideal for his people. Later on, Israel’s prophets promised that the tribes would be reunited after the exile. And books like Chronicles insisted that representatives of every tribe must settle in the Promised Land after the exile.
Moses’ emphasis on unity among the twelve tribal patriarchs in that world of Joseph and his brothers promoted national unity among the tribes of Israel in their world.
This emphasis also points toward one of the main ways the story of Joseph and his brothers should be applied to our modern world. Just as the tribes of Israel shared a common inheritance, all followers of Christ everywhere in the world share a common inheritance in Christ. Jesus established this unity in the inauguration of his kingdom. We must pursue this unity throughout the continuation of Christ’s kingdom. And we will one day delight in the perfect unity and harmony among God’s people at the consummation of Christ’s kingdom. Listen to Ephesians 4:3-6, where Paul said:

> Make every effort to keep the unity of the Spirit through the bond of peace. There is one body and one Spirit — just as you were called to one hope when you were called — one Lord, one faith, one baptism; one God and Father of all, who is over all and through all and in all (Ephesians 4:3-6).

Notice the logic of this passage. Paul called followers of Christ to “Make every effort to keep the unity of the Spirit.” Like the shared inheritance among Israel’s tribes, we have so much in common: one body, one Holy Spirit, one hope, one Lord, one faith, one baptism and one God and Father.
The story of Joseph and his brothers gives followers of Christ today many opportunities to reflect on the disharmony that often comes between us. And it provides a
great deal of practical guidance as we devote ourselves to the unity of God’s people throughout the world.

> Joseph’s story encouraged national unity among the Israelites because Joseph was a person that was full of forgiveness. And forgiveness is the only uniting factor that we have, not only for Israelites, for us as Christians, for families, for the life that we live in this world. Joseph was mistreated so much by his brothers, but when they were in trouble, he saved them... And when we look at Joseph’s story and how he forgave, he forgave something that was so huge. They wanted him dead. They did not want him alive. They did not want to meet him any other time. But Joseph did not want to do harm to them. He had the power, he had the leverage to do that, but he became godly and became maturer in faith than them and included them. And that can be repeated, and it can be replicated in Israel among the twelve tribes, it can be replicated in us, in our own families, in our churches, and it can be replicated in society. — Rev. Dr. Cyprian K. Guchienda

Now, as valuable as it is to realize that Moses’ special emphases promoted Israel’s national unity, it’s also important to realize why Moses needed to do this. In brief, Moses stressed the need for unity because God had also ordained national diversity for his people.

#### National Diversity

Put simply, all of the tribal patriarchs were Jacob’s heirs, but this didn’t mean that they were all treated in precisely the same. On the contrary, the rest of the Old Testament makes it clear that God gave the tribes of Israel different privileges and responsibilities. And Moses stressed the need for harmony among the tribes of Israel for one primary reason: the unity of Israel could be maintained only as the Israelites acknowledged that God himself had ordained their diverse tribal privileges and responsibilities.
Like the theme of unity, the theme of diversity weaves its way through every step of the story of Joseph and his brothers. But it’s particularly prominent in Genesis 47:28– 49:33. In these chapters, Jacob distributed his inheritance to all twelve of his sons, but he also established enduring differences among them and their descendants.
In these chapters, Moses promoted the national diversity of Israel by differentiating all of Jacob’s sons. However, for our purposes, we’ll look at just two: Judah and his descendants and, of course, Joseph and his descendants. Let’s consider first the honor given to Judah and his descendants.

Judah and Descendants. Moses moved the patriarch Judah to center stage several times in these chapters to confirm the prominence God had ordained for Judah and his tribe. Judah first appears in Genesis 37:12-36 when the brothers attempted to kill Joseph. In verses 26-27 Judah stood out from among his brothers and successfully intervened on Joseph’s behalf. Judah affirmed the harmony that should have characterized the brothers by reminding them in verse 27 that “[Joseph] is our brother, our own flesh and blood.” And we see here that Judah’s leadership was acknowledged when his brothers agreed to his plan.
Judah appears again in 38:1-30 when Moses recounted the story of Judah’s sin in Canaan. This episode contrasts Judah’s immorality with Joseph’s integrity in Potiphar’s house. But, in 38:26, Moses revealed Judah’s humble confession when Judah admitted, “[Tamar] is more righteous than I.” It’s clear that God accepted Judah’s repentance because God then blessed Judah with twin sons, Perez and Zerah.
Moses drew attention to Judah’s leadership again during the patriarchs’ second journey to Egypt in 44:14-34. When Benjamin was accused of having stolen a silver cup, Judah stepped forward in Joseph’s presence and pled for mercy. He spoke with humility, calling himself and his brothers Joseph’s “servants.” He expressed repentance over what he and his brothers had done by confessing that “God has uncovered your servants’ guilt.” He honored his father by noting “the misery that would come upon [his] father” if Benjamin did not return to Canaan. And he courageously offered to remain in Egypt “in place of the boy.”
And finally, in 49:1-28, Judah moved to the foreground during Jacob’s final blessings. In verses 8-12, Jacob declared that Judah and his tribe would be exalted to an unrivaled position of leadership. And the tribe of Judah would one day become the royal tribe of Israel. Listen to Jacob’s words in Genesis 49:8-10:

> Judah, your brothers will praise you; your hand will be on the neck of your enemies; your father’s sons will bow down to you... The scepter will not depart from Judah, nor the ruler’s staff from between his feet, until he comes to whom it belongs and the obedience of the nations is his (Genesis 49:8-10).

 Notice here that Judah’s “brothers will praise [him].” He will place his hand “on the neck of [his] enemies,” meaning that he will overcome everyone who opposes him. And Judah’s “father’s sons” — his brothers — “will bow down to [him].” True to his earlier characterizations, Moses indicated that the tribe of Judah would have authority over the other tribes of Israel.
It’s important to note that "the scepter” and “the ruler’s staff,” symbols of royalty, will be held by a descendant of Judah. Judah’s royal family will continue to rule “until he comes to whom it belongs and the obedience of the nations is his.”
Genesis 49:10 gives us the first explicit reference in Scripture to the fact that a descendant of Judah will become the king over the whole world. This is a clear reference to the Messiah of David’s house. And this future king will fulfill the promise of Genesis 12:3 where God told Abraham, “All peoples on earth will be blessed through you.” Through this king, God’s kingdom will reach the entire globe. And “the obedience of the nations” will be given to this great king from Judah.
It isn’t difficult to understand why Moses emphasized the exaltation of Judah in
that world for his original audience in their world. Judah wasn’t the first son of Jacob, and ordinarily he wouldn’t have had such prominence. So, while Moses wrote about Joseph and his brothers to promote national unity, he also expected them to maintain this unity in light of the fact that God had exalted the tribe of Judah in this way.
There are also many implications of Judah’s exaltation for modern followers of Christ in our world. But at the heart of it all is the fact that God promised a supreme king from Judah’s tribe. And this promise is fulfilled in the perfectly righteous son of David, Jesus, the King of the universe. Jesus took his throne in heaven at the inauguration of his kingdom. He reigns throughout the continuation of his kingdom until all his enemies are put under his feet. And at the consummation of his kingdom, he will reign forever over the new creation.
Having seen how Moses emphasized national diversity within Israel by focusing on Judah and his descendants, let’s turn to the obvious prominence of Joseph and his descendants in this part of Genesis.
Joseph and Descendants. As we’ve seen, Joseph is the main character of Genesis 37:2–50:26. But, unlike his brothers, Joseph is highly idealized in these chapters. In fact, the only time Moses hinted at a flaw in Joseph’s character was in the opening episode. In 37:2-11 we learn that Joseph agitated his brothers. He brought his father bad reports about them and boasted to them about his dreams of the future. But even this one negative feature is subtle. And Moses minimized it in verse 2 by mentioning that Joseph was "only seventeen."
Apart from this hint of imperfection, the portrait of Joseph is entirely positive. Joseph served Potiphar faithfully. He resisted Potiphar’s wife. He was without flaw in his service to Pharaoh. He wisely tested his brothers when they came to him. He was
tenderhearted toward them even after the evil they had done to him. He showed love for his father and for Benjamin. He blessed many nations as the leader of Egypt. In these and many other ways, Moses painted Joseph just as Jacob described him in Genesis 49:26. Joseph was “the prince among his brothers.”
Now realistically, we all know from common experience that Joseph must have sinned many times in his life. This has been true for every person in every age, except for Jesus. So, why did Moses idealize Joseph in this way? What was his purpose? The answer lies in the fact that God had given Joseph and his descendants special prominence among the tribes of Israel.
The prominence of Joseph and his descendants appears first in the special arrangements made for Joseph’s sons in Genesis 48:1-22. In these verses, Jacob blessed Joseph’s sons, Ephraim and Manasseh as if they were his own sons. According to 1 Chronicles 5:1, Reuben had lost his status as firstborn because he had committed incest. So, when Jacob adopted Ephraim and Manasseh as his own, it meant that Joseph received the double portion as Jacob’s firstborn.
One of the most fascinating segments of this arrangement appears in 48:13-20 where Jacob blessed Ephraim over Manasseh. Joseph carefully set his sons before Jacob so that Jacob’s right hand, the hand of greater blessing, would rest on Manasseh’s head. Then Jacob’s left hand, the hand of lesser blessing, would fall on Ephraim’s head. This arrangement seemed appropriate because Manasseh was Joseph’s firstborn son. But without explanation, Jacob crossed his hands as he reached out so that his left hand went
to Manasseh and his right hand went to Ephraim. Joseph was displeased with this and tried to move Jacob’s hands to favor Manasseh. But listen to what happened next in Genesis 48:19:

> His father refused and said, “I know, my son, I know. [Manasseh] too will become a people, and he too will become great. Nevertheless, his younger brother [Ephraim] will be greater than he, and his descendants will become a group of nations” (Genesis 48:19).

Or as it may be put, “a whole nation in themselves.” Passages like Numbers 2:18- 21 and Deuteronomy 33:17 indicate that Ephraim did become more numerous and prominent than Manasseh. In fact, Ephraim’s dominance was so great that later, during the period of the divided monarchy, the entire nation of northern Israel was often called “Ephraim.”
Now, all of this may seem irrelevant to modern followers of Christ. But the unexpected prominence given to Ephraim in that world of Joseph and his brothers pointed to a God-ordained arrangement that was particularly important to Moses’ first audience in their world. As Moses wrote the book of Genesis, he was about to hand the leadership of the nation over to Joshua, his protégé. But Joshua was not from the tribe of Levi like Moses and Aaron. He was not from the royal tribe of Judah. No, Joshua was from the tribe of Ephraim, the tribe that God had blessed with prominence over all others. In effect, Moses highlighted Ephraim in this account to validate his choice of successor. It was only after Joshua’s death that the tribe of Judah rose to distinction. Joshua, the Ephraimite, would lead the nation into the Promised Land.
As modern followers of Christ, this dimension of the story of Joseph and his
brothers calls us to acknowledge the diverse blessings and roles that God has ordained in our world. In the inauguration of his kingdom, Jesus blessed his people with a variety of gifts. He gave some as apostles, prophets, teachers, and the like. He called different people to different sorts of duties and privileges. Christ established this diversity, not to fragment his people, but to bind them to each other. And throughout the continuation of Christ’s kingdom, the Holy Spirit pours out his gifts as he wishes. And even at the consummation, we’ll see diversity in the ways that God honors those who’ve followed Christ. As we apply the story of Joseph and his brothers to our world, we must acknowledge and value the variety God has ordained among his people in every age.

## CONCLUSION
 
In this lesson on Joseph and his brothers, we’ve looked at the structure and content of the last major division of Genesis. And we’ve seen how Moses used these chapters to promote major themes, including those that appear in earlier sections of Genesis, and Moses’ special emphases in these chapters on the unity and diversity of the nation of Israel.
The story of Joseph and his brothers reveals how difficult it was for Israel’s patriarchs to live at peace with each other. But in the end, God established enduring bonds of love among them. This story of disharmony, reconciliation, and harmony was originally written to call the twelve tribes of Israel to repentance and unity as the people of God in their day. And it calls us today to resist division and to promote the bonds of
love that exist among us as followers of Christ. As the body of Christ, we are to share in Christ’s inheritance. And the story of Joseph and his brothers offers indispensable guidance for how we are to devote ourselves to the unity of God’s people today for the sake of his glorious kingdom throughout the world.

Dr. Scott Redd (Host) is President and Associate Professor of Old Testament at Reformed Theological Seminary, Washington D.C. Dr. Redd received his M.Div. from Reformed Theological Seminary and his M.A. and Ph.D. from The Catholic University of America. He has taught at Catholic University of America, the Augustine Theological Institute in Malta, and the International Training Institute in the Mediterranean basin. Dr. Redd has contributed to various publications such as Tabletalk (Ligonier Ministries), The Washington Post and First Things. In addition, he published Constituent Postponement in Biblical Hebrew Verse (Society of Biblical Literature, 2014) and Wholehearted: A Biblical Look at the Greatest Commandment and Personal Wealth (Institute for Faith, Work & Economics, 2016).
Dr. Stephen J. Bramer is Professor and Department Chair of Bible Exposition at Dallas Theological Seminary.
Dr. Robert B. Chisholm, Jr. is Department Chair and Professor of Old Testament at Dallas Theological Seminary.
Rev. Dr. Cyprian K. Guchienda is Pastor to All Nations at Highland Park Presbyterian Church in Dallas, TX.
Dr. Richard L. Pratt, Jr. is President of Third Millennium Ministries and Adjunct Professor of Old Testament at Reformed Theological Seminary, Orlando Campus.
Rev. Dr. Michael Walker is Theologian-in-residence at Highland Park Presbyterian Church in Dallas, TX.
Dr. Larry J. Waters is Professor of Bible Exposition at Dallas Theological Seminary.
