	
# Theological Foundations – Module Three – Jesus Christ
## Discussion Questions 

1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?
 

2.	What do the Scriptures mean by the term “Son of God” when it is applied to Jesus?


3.	In what ways do Jesus’ experiences prove that he was truly human?


4.	What does the Old Testament title “Christ” mean? How does Jesus fulfill this office?


5.	Discuss Jesus’ human nature and its relationship to his divine nature.


6.	Why was the incarnation necessary? What did Jesus accomplish by it?


7.	Why did Jesus subject himself to arrest, suffering, and crucifixion?


8.	Discuss the four parts of the exaltation of Jesus.


9.	How can Jesus’ divinity give us greater trust in him?


10.	How does Jesus’ humanity allow him to identify with us?


11.	How does the divinity of Christ help us understand God’s love for us?


12.	In what way can Jesus’ role as our mediator give us confidence before God without fear?  In what ways is it proper for a Christian to fear God?


13.	How can the humiliation that Christ endured for us encourage us as we endure trials and struggles in this life?
 
REVIEW STATEMENT on HUMANITY - OFFICE: The word "Christ" comes from the Greek and refers to the Old Testament hope of a Messiah, or anointed one, who would sit on the throne of David to rescue God's people and to establish his worldwide kingdom of righteousness. The Messiah had to be human because (1) he had to be a son of David according to the promises that God had made, (2) he had to die for his people (something only a human can do), and (3) he had to be the second Adam — the head of the human race in order to represent them.

CASE STUDY: Ron was a new Christian. He was telling his Christian friend how hard it was for him to read the Bible. "When I read any other story, I enjoy imagining myself as the hero. And even if it wouldn't be practically possible for me to be the hero, it's theoretically possible. I can imagine it as a possibility. But when I read the Bible, it's clear that I'm not the hero and could never be even theoretically. Christ is the human hero. I'm just being honest here, but I find this discouraging because deep down I want to be the hero. But when I read the story of the Bible, I'm more like the sidekick. It's humiliating."
## Reflection Questions
1.	Is the Bible harder to read than a good novel? Why or why not?
2.	Have you ever felt like Ron does about reading the Bible? Explain.
3.	Do you use your gifts to shine and be noticed, or do you use them to bless and serve God's people? Do you feel the tension between these two? Give examples.
4.	Do you regularly notice, point out and celebrate the gifts and achievements of others, or does celebrating other people’s gifts and achievements lessen your sense of importance and take the spotlight away from you? Give examples.
5.	Consider Hebrews 11. Is there any sense in which believers in Christ can be "secondary" heroes, reflecting the heroism of Christ as they believe in him and become increasingly effective kingdom agents? Explain. 
## Action Assignments
•	If the people in your church think that “Christ” is part of Jesus’ name, correct their misunderstanding, and make sure they understand not just the concept but the implications for their lives.
•	This week, focus specifically on the following thought: “In the Bible the "sidekick" is also the beloved bride. Be humble because you are not the main hero. Be bold because God has given believers a heroic role in his kingdom — one that reflects his own great heroism.”
•	Instead of using your gifts to shine and be noticed this month, use your gifts to bless the bride of Christ and those who might eventually become part of Christ’s bride. By doing so you honor the great hero, the King, the Christ.
