# Study Guide 
# Theological Foundations
# Module Three – Jesus Christ

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for the final exam of the Theological Foundations course.
.
**********************************

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 – 18:11

Introduction 

I. Divinity 

	A. Son of God

	B. Lord 



## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. How do the Scriptures use the phrase "son of God"?

2. Make sure you are familiar with the contents of the following passages regarding the divinity of Jesus:
	John 1:1-18
	John 8:18-23
	John 10:30
	John 5:18
	Hebrews 1:1-3

3. Make sure you are familiar with the contents of the following passages: 
	John 6:38
	John 8:28-29
	John 15:26
	1 Peter 1:11

4. Note the valid translations of the Greek word "kurios" (this is an English transliteration of the Greek word).

5. Which name of God is translated in the Septuagint (Greek translation of the Old Testament) as "kurios"? 

6. Romans 10:9 teaches that if we confess that Jesus is _______ and believe in our heart that God raised Him from the dead, we will be saved. 

7. Explain the nature of Jesus in terms of the "ontological" Trinity.

8. Explain the role of Jesus within the "economic" Trinity. 

9. What is the significance of calling Jesus "Lord" in the context of the Apostles’ Creed?
