## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 18:12 - 57:28

II. Humanity

      A. Experiences

  	1. Generation

  	2. Body

  	3. Soul 

  	4. Resurrection 

      B. Office 

  	1. Old Testament Background 

  	2. Fulfillment in Jesus 

      C. Nature 



## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. In the early centuries after Christ, did people question mostly the divinity of Jesus or His humanity?

2. In what ways was the humanity of Christ manifested in His birth and in His sufferings?

3. Besides Jesus, what other human beings had no human father?

4. What does Hebrews 2:14-17 teach about why Jesus took on human flesh?

5. Explain the significance of Jesus being a descendant of David.

6. Explain the teaching of the lesson regarding the parts of man and the meaning of the human "soul."

7. What kind of body will believers receive in the final resurrection?

8. What is the linguistic origin of the name "Christ"? 

9. Why was it important to note that Jesus was a descendant of David?

10. Explain the meaning of "hypostatic union."

11. Make sure you can state the orthodox position regarding the person and natures of Christ. 

12. What does Philippians 2:5 teach about the change Jesus experienced when He became a man? Did He lose divine attributes? Did He give up His divine glory?
 
13. What does the Chalcedonian Creed say about Christ? 

14. Make sure you are familiar with the contents of the following passages:

  1 Corinthians 15:20-23 
  Jeremiah 23:5-6
  John 4:25-26
  Romans 3:10-12


