
### Discussion Topics:

1.	What has been your experience with prayer? How is your current prayer life?

2.	How much do we depend upon God? How is this concept basic to prayer?

3.	How can descriptions of God’s character help us focus more on Him as we pray? Give a few descriptions that are used in biblical prayers.

4.	List five blessings you have received as the result of the death and resurrection of Christ. Also, list five things you are waiting to receive from Christ.

5.	Read Psalm 30 and discuss it. In what ways can prayer be a means to joy? How may we transform trouble into joy as we pray?

6.	In what ways can prayer stem from greed? How can we avoid selfish prayers?

7.	If God’s sovereign plan does not change, why do we pray? Does God really answer prayers?

8.	Of what value are freedom/spontaneity or form/forethought in prayer? What dangers are present when one is emphasized to the exclusion of the other? How can those dangers be avoided?

9.	What are some of the different ways you can pray? Discuss advantages of each.

10.	Matthew 6:5-15 is the Lord’s Prayer. Read and discuss. What do you learn about prayer in this passage?

11.	What elements from the Lord’s prayer can you incorporate into your own prayer life?

12.	What is the basis and purpose of showing gratitude in prayer? How often do we miss this dimension of prayer?

13.	Why is body language a valuable part of prayer? What positions for prayer are taught in the Bible? How can we begin to use body language in prayer?

### Call to Action:

1. Following all the steps prescribed by your trainer, spend some time alone in prayer.

2. Keeping in mind many of the things discussed in this badge, spend some time praying with your group or a group of friends.

3. Following all the steps prescribed by your trainer, lead a time of intentional prayer with your local church.

### Badge Criteria:

This badge shall be awarded by Thirdmill Institute as a part of the Foundations Certificate upon successful completion of the call to action by the student in a manner that is faithfully consistent with the badge components and in light of the topics discussed throughout the course. 
