# Study Guide 
# Old Testament Foundations
# Module Two – A Perfect World

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for this course’s final exam.

**********************************

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 – 15:13

Introduction  

I. Overview

      A. Inspiration 

  	1. Reliability 

  	2. Design 

      B. Background 

  	1. Availability 

  	2. Interaction 

      C. Purpose 

## REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What is Dr. Pratt's position regarding the inspiration of the Bible? 

2.  What does Dr. Pratt say about Moses' selection and arrangement of the historical events as he wrote Genesis? 

3. Were there other accounts of the origins of the world that would have been available for Moses to read during his youth in Egypt?

4. Describe the basic content of the following ancient document:
	The "Enuma Elish"
	The "Gilgamish Epic"
	The "Atrahasis Epic"

5. How did Moses make use of ancient myths as he wrote Genesis? 

6. Describe Moses' purpose in writing Genesis, according to Dr. Pratt.  
OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 15:13 – 26:05

II. Literary Structure 

      A. Dark Chaotic World: Genesis 1:1-2 

      B. Ideal World: Genesis 2:1-3 

      C. Six Days of Ordering: Genesis 1:3-31 


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. Explain some of the different interpretations of the creation story. Which ones does Dr. Pratt say are acceptable in Evangelical circles? What is Dr. Pratt's personal view?

2. What is the basic meaning of the phrase "formless and empty" in Genesis 1:2? 

3. How does Dr. Pratt divide Genesis 1:1-2:3? Write his descriptive titles for each section.

4.  Write the description of what God made on each of the six days of creation.

5.  How does Dr. Pratt describe days 1, 2, and 3 of the creation? 

6. How does Dr. Pratt describe days 4, 5 and 6 of the creation? 

7. What phrase is repeated in Genesis chapter one, verses 4, 10, 12, 18, 21, and 25? 

