# Study Guide 
# Biblical Foundations
# Module Six – The Background of Acts

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for this course’s final exam.

**********************************

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 – 22:02

I. Introduction

II. Authorship


      A. Gospel of Luke 

  	1. Explicit 

  	2. Implicit

     B. Early Church 

  	1. Manuscripts 

  	2. Early Church Leaders

      C. New Testament

  	1. Anonymous Author

  	2. Luke


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. How do Luke 1:1-4 and Acts 1:1 point to the fact that Luke wrote both the gospel and the Book of Acts?
       
2. What evidence is given by Dr. Bayer that the gospel of Luke and Acts were written by the same author?
       
3. What is the name of the early manuscript containing portions of Luke and John, probably copied between AD 175 and AD 200, and found in Egypt in 1952? 
       
4. What is the name of the earliest known document listing the New Testament books that the Church considered canonical?
       
5. What evidence is there from the early Church about the authorship of Acts?
       
6. What was Luke's status or position in the church in his day?
       
7. What was Luke's profession?
       
8. How does the Greek of Luke and Acts compare to the other New Testament books?
       
9. What change do we observe in the form of narrating events, beginning in Acts 16:10?
       
10. Which early church writers indicate explicitly that Luke is the author of Acts, according to the quotes that Dr. Bayer cites?
       
11. According to Dr. Bayer, what conclusion can we draw about the person of Luke from the fact that Luke 1:1-2 speaks of things learned from "...those who were eyewitnesses"?
       
12. When did Luke begin traveling with Paul's ministry?
       
13. According to Dr. Bayer, when was Luke probably converted?

