## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 22:02 – 47:02

III. Historical Setting

      A. Date 

  	1. After A.D. 70 

  	2. Before A.D. 70

      B. Original Audience

 	1. Theophilus

  	2. Broader Audience

      C. Social Context

  	1. Roman Empire

  	2. Jews 


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. What is Dr. Bayer's opinion about the date of composition of the Book of Acts?
       
2. What names are mentioned in Acts that are also mentioned in historical accounts written around 79 AD?
       
3. What arguments are used by Dr. Bayer to support his view about when Acts was written?
       
4. What is Dr. Bayer's view about the audience to whom Acts was written?
       
5. How did public works such as roads and buildings built by the Roman Empire help the spread of the gospel?
       
6. What was the attitude of the Roman Empire toward the Jewish religion and the Christian religion at the time Acts was written?
       
7. What was the attitude of the early Christians toward the Jewish leaders at the time Acts was written?
       
8. What is the name of the historian who wrote "Antiquities" around 79 AD?
        
9. At the time Acts was written, were Gentiles permitted to become Jewish proselytes?
       
10. How did the early church view Gentile believers in regards to their status in the Church?
       
11. Describe some the problems of the early Church mentioned in Acts and referenced in the lesson?


 
 
## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 47:02 – 1:26:59

IV. Theological Background

      A. Old Testament

  	1. History

  	2. Israel

      B. Kingdom of God

  	1. Jewish Theology

  	2. John the Baptist

  	3. Christian Theology 

      C. Gospel of Luke 

  	1. Jesus

  	2. Apostles 

V. Conclusion


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. How does Dr. Bayer compare Old Testament theology with the theology taught in the Book of Acts?
       
2. What is the Old Testament teaching about God's choice of Abraham? 
       
3. How does Dr. Bayer compare Old Testament teaching about the Gentiles with the teaching of Acts about the Gentiles?
       
4. Summarize the attitude toward Moses expressed in the teaching in Acts.
       
5. Acts 7:36-39 says, "Moses...told the Israelites, 'God will send you a __________________ from your own people.'"
       
6. Summarize the view of Acts toward the dynasty of David, as compared with the Old Testament view.
       
7. Psalm 72:8,17 indicates that __________ would rule from sea to sea.
       
8. According to Dr. Bayer, Luke wanted his readers to understand that Jesus fulfilled special roles regarding key people from the Old Testament. Summarize the Old Testament person with the role that Jesus fulfilled.
       
9. According to Dr. Bayer, how does Luke interpret the way the kingdom of God expands?
       
10. What do we learn about the coming of the kingdom from the Parable of the Ten Minas in Luke 19:12-27?
       
11. What do we learn from Acts 1:3-8 about the coming of the kingdom, according to Dr. Bayer?
       
12. In Acts 17:24-27, what part of the biblical narrative is emphasized by Paul in his teaching in Athens?
       
13. What were the various views of the Messiah himself when Acts was written?
       
14. What were the various views of the Messiah's coming when Acts was written?

