
## Discussion Topics:

Practicality – What does teaching or preaching usually look like in your church or ministry? Who usually teaches or preaches? How long does it usually last?

Prayer – What is the role of prayer as you choose a passage, prepare your lesson or sermon, deliver it, and trust the Holy Spirit for the results?

Plan – How should you choose a passage or topic? What passages relate to the topic you want to teach on?

Parts – How is the passage divided? What is the subject of the passage? What is the main point of the passage? What are the sub-points the author uses to help the main point? What details are used to enlighten the subject?

Prepare – Are there any confusing words or phrases in your text? Are there any names or places of significance that should be explained? What resources can/should you have to help you study this passage? How does this author or other biblical authors develop the same theme?

Persons – What kind of people make up the typical group where you teach or preach?

Purpose – What is the distinct outcome you hope results from what you communicate?

Prune – What illustrations/ideas should be kept? What should be cut?

Produce – Should you write out your lesson/sermon and read it to your listeners? Write it out and memorize it? Have an outline and notes with you?

Practice – Should/where/how could you practice your lesson/sermon before delivering it? After practicing, is there anything you should change?

Point – In Luke 24:27 Jesus, on the road to Emmaus, showed how all Scripture pointed to him. How does your lesson/sermon point to Jesus?

Pace – Do you talk too fast, or too slow, or without much variation in speed?

Provide – Have you given your audience anything to think about or do as they leave?

Ponder – Will your listeners be stirred in their love and devotion to Jesus alone?

Power – What is the difference in delivering a lesson/sermon by the power of the Holy Spirit versus delivering one in your own strength?


## Call to Action:

1. Following all the steps prescribed by your trainer, prepare a lesson/sermon and deliver it to those in your group.

2. Ask the following questions for feedback:
What made sense? What didn’t?
What resonated with you?
What difference will/can these ideas make in my own life?
Did this lesson/sermon stir my affections for Jesus?

3. Deliver the same lesson/sermon in a local church.

## Badge Criteria:

This badge shall be awarded by the trainer upon successful completion of the call to action in a manner that is faithfully consistent with the badge components and in light of the topics discussed throughout the course. 
