
# Study Guide 
# Biblical Foundations
# Module Eight – The Book of Acts, Major Themes

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for this course’s final exam.

**********************************

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 – 40:51

Introduction

I. The Holy Spirit

      A. Before Pentecost

1. Timing

2. Purpose

      B. Day of Pentecost

1. Significance

2. Tongues

3. Results

      C. After Pentecost

1. Samaria

2. Caesarea

3. Ephesus


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. What exactly were the Jews expecting, at the time before the events of Pentecost in Acts 1-2, regarding the work of the Messiah?
       
2. How did Jesus correct the error of His disciples with regard to the timing of the restoration of the kingdom?
       
3. According to Dr. Bayer, with what kind of power was the Spirit associated in the Old Testament?
       
4. Summarize the significance of the celebration of the Jewish Pentecost.
       
5. How does Dr. Bayer understand the gift of tongues experienced on the Day of Pentecost in Acts 2?
       
6. How does Dr. Bayer view the manifestations of the Spirit on the Day of Pentecost in Acts 2 in regards to the normal experience of all Christians in our day?
       
7. Dr. Bayer argues that the experiences of the Day of Pentecost in Acts 2 were meant to __________ the final stage of the kingdom of God.
       
8. How was Peter viewed in regards to his education and speaking ability?
       
9. Summarize Dr. Bayer's view concerning the experiences in Samaria (Acts 8), Caesarea (Acts 10), and Ephesus (Acts 19) as they relate to believers today?
