## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 40:51 – 1:10:05

II. Apostles

      A. Unique 

1. Requirements 

2. Foundational Time 

      B. Authoritative

1. Function 

2. Blessings

3. Miracles 

4. Revelation

      C. Varied

1. Strategies

2. Settings


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. According to tradition, what became of most of the apostles?
       
2. What were the requirements of an apostle, according to Acts 1:21-26?      	
       
3. How did Paul meet the requirements of an apostle?
       
4. Summarize Dr. Bayer’s perspective regarding the possibility of apostles today.
       
5. What does the Greek word for “apostle” (“apostolos”) mean literally?
       
6. According to Dr. Bayer, what was the key function of miracles throughout the Bible?
       
7. According to 2 Corinthians 12:12, what marked an apostle?
       
8. What were some of the strategies that confirmed the apostles' message?
       
9. In what settings did the apostles preach the message of the gospel? That is, what channels did they use?
       
10. What was the name of the new apostle appointed to replace Judas?
       
11. What differences distinguish the apostles from other missionaries sent out by Christ, according to Dr. Bayer?
       
12. What was Gamaliel’s advice regarding the apostles?
   

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 1:10:05 – 1:32:17

III. The Church

      A. Necessity

1. Physical Limitations

2. Temporal Limitations

      B. Preparation 

1. Teaching

2. Officers

3. Hardships

Conclusion


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. Summarize why the apostles needed to delegate others to preach the message of the gospel, as explained by Dr. Bayer?
       
2. What event made the apostles especially aware of the fact that not all of them would survive until Christ returned, according to Dr. Bayer?
       
3. In Ephesians 2:19-20, the apostles and prophets are called the _______ of the Church.
       
4. In Acts 2:42, we read that the early believers dedicated themselves to the "apostles' _____________".
       
5. Have all Christian churches agreed that there are two biblical offices in the Church (i.e. - elders and deacons)?
       
6. In Acts 6, they chose men full of the Spirit and wisdom to help with what task?
       
7. In Acts 14:23, we read that Paul and Barnabas appointed _______ in each church.
       
8. In the Council of Jerusalem (Acts 15), who made the official decision?
       
9. In Acts 14:21-22, Paul and Barnabas told the disciples that they must enter the kingdom of God "through many _______".
       
10. Who was the leader of the church in Jerusalem when Acts was written?
       
11. In Acts 20, what did Paul tell the Ephesian elders about his future?
       
12. In Acts 20:28-31, Paul tells the Ephesians that what group would arise from among them?
 
