	
# Old Testament Foundations – Module Nine
# Joseph and His Brothers
## Discussion Questions

1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	How did Joseph contribute to the disharmony between the brothers? 


3.	How did Joseph's benevolent rule in Egypt benefit the people of Egypt? How did it benefit his own family? 


4.	What four emphases does the story of Joseph share with the records of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob? Give some examples of how we see these emphases in Joseph's story.

5.	What lessons can we learn from the story of Joseph about providence?


6.	How might Joseph’s example encourage you to stay faithful to God in the midst of difficult circumstances?


7.	God gave Joseph and his brothers grace many times throughout this story, though sometimes it may not have seemed this way to them. How does this help you to recognize God’s grace and benevolence in your own life, even in the midst of life’s challenges?


8.	What are some ways that you and your church might extend God's blessings to those both inside and outside the community of believers?


9.	What lessons can we learn from the story of Joseph about forgiveness?

10.	Have you ever experienced conflict in a church because people were not forgiving each other?  Or have you ever had a hard time forgiving someone?  How does the story of Joseph help us learn to forgive?

REVIEW STATEMENT on MAJOR THEMES – SPECIAL EMPHASES – NATIONAL DIVERSITY: God has given a unique name (Revelation 2:17) and particularly suited gifts to each of his children. Paul says, "grace was given to each one of us according to the measure of Christ's gift" (Ephesians 4:7). Some gifts are more visible than others. Some are more appreciated by a given culture than are others. But each child of God has a special role in his kingdom purposes. We are to use our gifts faithfully, and to appreciate and benefit from the gifts of those the Lord places in our path.

CASE STUDY: John had set up an appointment to talk with Pastor Bob about John's gifts. "What are my gifts?" he asked. "I've read lots of books and even taken three spiritual gift inventories. But what they tell me doesn't seem to fit. I can't figure out what my gifts are." Pastor Bob asked what the inventories revealed. "Service," he said. But I'm a very shy person. I help in my quiet way. Pastor Bob then prayed for John and said he would think about it. After the meeting, Pastor Bob said, "By the way, Mrs. Smith is planning to move and needs some help cleaning her house to sell it. Maybe you could help her out." John replied, "Oh, well, I'll think about it. I'm not sure I have the time."
## Reflection Questions 
1.	What do you think your gifts are? Write them down. 
2.	One of the best ways of discovering your gifts is to respond faithfully to the opportunities to serve that the Lord puts in your path. It’s in the midst of serving to the best of one’s ability that one discovers his or her gifts. Reflect on the case studies above.
3.	Sometimes people aren’t happy with their gifts because those particular gifts aren’t highly valued by their culture. If you find this to be the case, reflect on the fact that being unhappy with the gift God has given you is also being unhappy with Christ and the name he has given you. 
## Action Assignments
•	Ask 5-10 people to write down what they think your gifts are. 
•	Compare your list with the list of others. 
•	Do the people in your church know what their gifts are? If you are the pastor, or in conjunction with the pastor, have the people of your church follow this same procedure, and share their results with the leadership of the church. 
•	Within your time constraints, don’t automatically resist or refuse opportunities the Lord gives you just because you aren’t sure you would like to do them. Pray about it, ask for counsel, and be open to the Lord’s leading. By serving in various situations, the Lord will confirm to you what your gifts are.  
o	Encourage the people of your church to do the same. 
•	Commit yourself before the Lord to invest in others instead of promoting yourself. This means loving them truly. 
