# Old Testament Foundations – Module Six
# Father Abraham: Structure, Content, and Original Meaning
## Discussion Questions 

1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	What are the names this lesson gives to the three main sections of Genesis? What does each section contain?


3.	Why did Moses craft his literary portrait of Israel’s first patriarch in this way?


4.	What four main themes of Abraham’s life are introduced in Genesis 12:1-3?


5.	Describe the two ‘worlds’ that Moses kept in mind as he wrote for the Israelites.


6.	Summarize each major step of Abraham’s life and how it related to Moses’ original audience. 


7.	How does recognition of Moses’ authorship of Genesis provide insight into the meaning of these accounts of Abraham’s life?


8.	Why do you think Moses desired that the Israelites understand that their blessings had a purpose?


9.	In what ways have you and your church community been a blessing to others? 


10.	The motif of divine grace reminded the Israelites that they were recipients of God’s mercy. How have you benefited from God’s divine grace?


11.	Like Abraham’s failure with Hagar, at times we justify our own plans instead of following God’s plan. In what situations are you tempted to do this? 
REVIEW STATEMENT on MAJOR THEMES – UNFOLDING – DIVINE GRACE: God initiates our relationship with him by his grace, and he sustains our relationship with him by his grace.

CASE STUDY: John was a devout Christian but he misunderstood God's grace. He knew he was saved initially by grace, but somehow thought that in order to grow as a Christian he had to earn God's favor. So he was very active as a Christian, but he was always wondering if he had done enough to gain God's favor. He eventually became discouraged because even though he was busy every day visiting people, witnessing and doing maintenance in the church building, he didn't have the assurance that he was growing spiritually. He wondered if all his effort was worth it, if God really noticed or cared.  
## Reflection Questions 
1.	Many Christians believe that they have been saved by grace, but that once saved, the way to grow as a Christian by works — by doing something to deserve it. What do you think of this common belief? Discuss it in your learning community. 
2.	Many Christians, on hearing the Biblical teaching that Christians are saved initially and sustained always by God’s grace, wonder what keeps people from taking advantage of God’s grace. They could argue, “We might as well keep on sinning since salvation from, beginning to end, is based on God’s grace and now on our works. God will always forgive us anyway.” Have you ever felt this way or wondered about it? How would you answer this question? 
3.	The grace of God is so radical that the apostle Paul anticipated a similar question in Romans 6:1. I’ll paraphrase it this way: “If we are saved by grace, why not keep sinning so people will see how gracious God is? The more we sin, the more people will see his grace.” 
a.	Read Paul’s answer to the question in Romans 6:2-7 and discuss it in your learning community.  
## Action Assignments
•	Ask five Christians what it means to them to be saved by grace? Don’t do this as a cold survey or test, but as a friendly conversation. See if they understand what it is, that salvation is possible only by grace, and what it means for daily life. 
•	Prepare and deliver a devotional making it clear that not only initial salvation but also Christian growth is not by works but by grace. 
•	Get feedback on the devotional to see if people understood.
•	Rework the devotional to make it clearer and more helpful to people.
