# Old Testament Foundations – Module Three – Paradise Lost and Found
## Discussion Questions 

1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	Give an overview of the major sections of Genesis 2:4 - 3:24.


3.	How did Moses identify the Garden of Eden and why did he explain the holiness of the Garden?


4.	Explain how Moses described the motif of loyalty in both Eden and Canaan.


5.	Explain the consequences of Adam and Eve’s disloyalty.


6.	Explain how the primeval events of Genesis 2-3 connected with the lives of the Israelites in Moses’ day.


7.	What can we learn about temptation from Genesis 2:4-3:24?


8.	How do you see yourself struggling with the same temptations that Adam and Eve faced? What can you learn from the Genesis account to help resist temptation?


9.	What hope can modern believers draw from the fact that Christ has begun to reverse the damage caused by Adam and Eve’s disobedience? 


10.	Read James 1:12-15. How does James give perspective regarding trials during the continuation of the kingdom? How should this encourage believers to be faithful to God?


11.	Read Revelation 22:12. John looked ahead and saw the new world as a return to the paradise that was lost. How does God’s redemptive plan for history give your life purpose and meaning?
 
REVIEW STATEMENT on MODERN APPLICATION – INAUGURATION & CONTINUATION: Just as Moses encouraged faithfulness in Israel during the trials in the wilderness by reminding them of the temptation of Adam and Eve, so Paul and James encouraged us to fidelity during the trials that face us between the inauguration of the kingdom and its consummation. By God's grace we must in faith do all we can to remain faithful to Christ so that we may be honored with the gift of eternal life in paradise.

CASE STUDY: In April of 1521, Martin Luther was pressured by the Diet of Worms to recant his writings. Luther knew that doing so could result in his execution. His response was this: "Unless I am convinced by the testimony of the Scriptures or by clear reason (for I do not trust either in the pope or in councils alone, since it is well known that they have often erred and contradicted themselves), I am bound by the Scriptures I have quoted and my conscience is captive to the Word of God. I cannot and will not recant anything, since it is neither safe nor right to go against conscience. May God help me. Amen." (Brecht, Martin. Martin Luther. tr. James L. Schaaf, Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1985 93, 1:460.) Knowing very well that refusing to recant might mean his death, he nevertheless said that it was not "safe" to recant. He knew he was safe in the arms of Jesus.
## Reflection Questions 	
In what ways have you experienced trials that tempt you not to remain loyal? 	
1.	What feelings accompany that temptation? 
2.	Specifically, what are you tempted to do or not to do? 
3.	How have you dealt with these temptations? 
4.	Are there ways you feel you could be dealing with them more biblically? 
5.	Discuss this with your learning community. 
## Action Assignments
Based on this lesson, how would you encourage those in your church to remain loyal? 
•	Write down a short message encouraging faithfulness. 
•	Try it out on some people in a small group or with individuals who need encouragement. Have a friend observe. 
•	Afterward, together with your friend observer, write down their responses — intellectual, emotional and behavioral. 
•	Modify your presentation if necessary based on their response in order to make it more effective. 


