## GOALS AND OBJECTIVES

### Goals

In this course, we would like to accomplish the following:

1. We hope you will make use of all the elements of the course to 
- grasp the unity of the Old and New Testaments, as expressed in the theme of the Kingdom of God, 
- understand the purpose of God in the history of the Old and New Testaments, as expressed in the covenants, and to 
- discern how their teachings should be applied in our lives today.
2. We hope you will become more enthusiastic about your study of the Old and New Testaments.
3. We hope you make changes in your life as a response to the teachings of this course. It should help you interpret and apply passages from the whole Bible.

### Objectives

When you have done the following, it will show that the goals are met:

1. Obtain satisfactory grades on the quizzes and test, demonstrating that you can identify 
- key concepts of the Kingdom of God, as expressed in both the Old and New 
- the key covenants of the Old Testament and explain their relationships to the New Covenant, 
- valid principles for using the Old and New Testaments today.
2. Complete the study guides and other assignments of the course, expressing your thoughts and attitudes regarding the Old Testament, and showing how you have applied the teachings of the course to your own life, especially that you are taking into account the unity of the Old Testament, the history of the covenants, and the theme of the kingdom of God to interpret and apply passages of the Old Testament.
3. Participate in weekly discussions that both review and reflect up on the teachings of the Thirdmill videos, in order to more fully understand the concepts and apply them to your life and ministry.

## Thematic Outline of the Course

1. Why Study the Old Testament?
2. The Kingdom of God in the Old Testament
3. Divine Covenants
4. The Canon of the Old Testament
5. Why Study the New Testament?
6. The Kingdom of God in the New Testament
7. The New Covenant
