List of Contributors to this course (institutions listed relative to the time of recording)
Dr. David R. Bauer is Dean of the School of Biblical Interpretation and the Ralph Waldo Beeson Professor of Inductive Biblical Studies at Asbury Theological Seminary.
Dr. Rick Boyd is Professor of Biblical Interpretation at Wesley Biblical Seminary.
Dr. Constantine R. Campbell is Associate Professor of New Testament at Trinity Evangelical Divinity School.
Dr. D.A. Carson is Research Professor of New Testament at Trinity Evangelical Divinity School and Co-founder of The Gospel Coalition.
Dr. Robert B. Chisholm, Jr. is Department Chair and Professor of Old Testament at Dallas Theological Seminary.
Dr. Ashish Chrispal is Regional Director for Asia for the Overseas Council.
Dr. David Correa is an associate Professor at San Pablo Theological Seminary in Merida, Mexico and the Director of Next Institute Mexico. He also serves as Pastor of Presbyterian Iglesia Jesus in Progreso.
Dr. Brandon D. Crowe is Assistant Professor of New Testament at Westminster Theological Seminary.
Mr. Sherif Atef Fahim teaches at Alexandria School of Theology in Egypt.
Rev. Michael J. Glodo is Associate Professor of Biblical Studies at Reformed Theological Seminary in Orlando, Florida.
Dr. Douglas Gropp was formerly Professor of Old Testament and Associate Academic Dean at Redeemer Seminary.
Dr. James M. Hamilton is Associate Professor of Biblical Theology at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary and Preaching Pastor of Kenwood Baptist Church.
Dr. Joel C. Hunter is Senior Pastor of Northland, A Church Distributed in Longwood, FL.
Rev. Clete Hux is Director and Counter-Cult Apologist at Apologetics Resource Center in Birmingham, AL.
Dr. Thaddeus J. James, Jr. is Vice President of Academic Affairs at Birmingham Theological Seminary.
Dr. Mark A. Jennings is Adjunct Professor of New Testament at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary.
Mr. Bradley T. Johnson is Adjunct Professor at Asbury Theological Seminary and Pastor of Wesley Chapel UMC in Nicholasville, KY.
Dr. Dennis E. Johnson is Professor Emeritus of Practical Theology at Westminster Seminary California.
Dr. Jim Jordan is an international trainer for Training Leaders International.
Dr. Edward M. Keazirian is Assistant Professor of Greek and Director of the Greek Language Program at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary.
Dr. Craig Keener is the F.M. and Ada Thompson Chair of Biblical Studies at Asbury Theological Seminary.
Dr. Daniel Kim teaches Old Testament at Covenant Theological Seminary.
Rev. Kevin Labby is Senior Pastor of Willow Creek Church in Winter Springs, FL.
Dr. Dan Lacich serves on the pastoral team of Northland, A Church Distributed, in Orlando FL.
Dr. Richard Lints is Professor of Theology and Vice President for Academic Affairs at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary.
Dr. Robert MacEwen is a Lecturer of Biblical Studies and Director of the Chinese Theology Department at East Asia School of Theology, Singapore.
Dr. Sean McDonough is Professor of New Testament at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary.
Rev. Timothy Mountfort is Academic Dean at Western China Covenant Theological Seminary.
Dr. Matthew Newkirk is President and Professor of Old Testament at Christ Bible Seminary in Okazaki, Japan.
Dr. Jeffrey J. Niehaus is Professor of Old Testament at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary.
Dr. Jason Oakes is Assistant Professor of Christian Thought at the Talbot School of Theology.
Dr. Luis Orteza is Adjunct Professor for Counseling at Birmingham Theological Seminary.
Dr. Grant R. Osborne (1942-2018) was Professor of New Testament at Trinity Evangelical Divinity School.
Dr. John Oswalt is the Visiting Distinguished Professor of Old Testament at Asbury Theological Seminary.
Dr. Alvin Padilla is Dean of Hispanic Ministries and Professor of New Testament at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary.
Dr. Jonathan T. Pennington is Associate Professor of New Testament Interpretation and the Director of Research Doctoral Studies at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.
Dr. Gregory R. Perry is Associate Professor of New Testament and Director of City Ministry Initiative at Covenant Theological Seminary, St. Louis, MO.
Yohanes Praptowarso, Ph.D. serves at Batu Theological Seminary.
Dr. Clay Quarterman was President of Evangelical Reformed Seminary of Ukraine until he retired in 2019.
Dr. Scott Redd is Campus President of Reformed Theological Seminary in Washington D.C. and Associate Professor of Old Testament.
Rev. Ric Rodeheaver is Senior Pastor at Christ Community Church of Laguna Hills in California.
Dr. Mike Ross teaches Practical Theology at Reformed Theological Seminary, Charlotte, NC, and was formerly Senior Pastor of Christ Covenant Church in Matthews, NC.
Dr. Brian D. Russell is Professor of Biblical Studies and Dean of the School of Urban Ministry at Asbury Theological Seminary in Orlando, FL.
Dr. Philip Ryken is President of Wheaton College.
Dr. Eckhard Schnabel is the Mary F. Rockefeller Distinguished Professor of New Testament at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary.
Dr. Glen Scorgie is Professor of Theology at Bethel Seminary's San Diego Campus.
Dr. Daniel Simango is Principal at The Bible Institute of South Africa in Cape Town.
Dr. Vuyani Sindo is a lecturer at George Whitefield College in South Africa.
Dr. Daniel Steffen is Visiting Professor at Seminario Teológical Centroamericano in Guatemala City.
Dr. Mark L. Strauss is Professor of New Testament at Bethel Seminary, San Diego.
Dr. Derek Thomas is Professor of Systematic and Historical Theology at Reformed Theological Seminary in Atlanta, GA.
Rev. Dr. Simon Vibert is the former Vicar of St. Luke's Church, Wimbledon Park, UK, and is presently the Vice Principal of Wycliffe Hall, Oxford, and Director of the School of Preaching.
Dr. Peter Walker has served as Professor of Biblical Studies at Trinity School for Ministry and as Associate Vice-Principal at Wycliffe Hall, Oxford. He is currently an instructor with Jerusalem Center for Biblical Studies.
Dr. Stephen J. Wellum is Professor of Christian Theology at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.
Dr. Stephen E. Witmer is Adjunct Professor of New Testament at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary.
Dr. Jonathan D. Worthington is Director of Curriculum Development at Training Leaders International.
