# New Testament Foundations – Module Three – The Gospel of Mark
## Discussion Questions 

1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	Who was the original audience of Mark’s gospel?


3.	How did Jesus demonstrate his power in Mark’s gospel?


4.	How did Jesus suffer during his messianic ministry?


5.	How did Jesus achieve victory through his resurrection?


6.	How did Jesus fulfill the Old Testament expectations about the Messiah as a suffering servant?


7.	How do people today misunderstand Jesus? How does the Gospel o fMark help clarify who He really is?


8.	How can you exhibit servant leadership in your current circumstances and ministry?


9.	How do you feel knowing that being a follower of Christ will involve suffering and difficulties in this life?


10.	How should we make use of the power God has given us to suffer and serve?


11.	How can we remain hopeful in the victory of Jesus in the midst of suffering and persecution?


12.	How should we live in this time when the kingdom is temporarily veiled, growing slowly, and even suffering?
 
REVIEW STATEMENT on MAJOR THEMES – CONQUERING KING: Jesus claimed to be the King of Israel, the Son of David who would restore the glory of David's throne and rule over his people. He announced the good news that the Kingdom was near and that its blessing would be given to all who would repent and believe. Jesus demonstrated his power and authority by controlling nature, casting out demons, healing the sick, raising the dead, requiring obedience and submission to his authority, and by forgiving sins. Jesus also conquered all his enemies, although until his second coming they still rage and we his people are still involved in war. But we are at war with defeated enemies and one day the victory that Jesus won will be clearly revealed and its implications fully realized.

CASE STUDY: When Jesus calmed the storm in Mark 4:35-41, there was no safer place to be than on mission with Jesus to the other side of the lake. There was no safer place to be than in the midst of the storm. In the Old Testament, the seas are often symbols of the enemies of God's kingdom. So when Jesus exercised authority over the winds and the waves, he was showing his authority over all his enemies. In this sense, his calming of the sea was a foretaste of his death and resurrection by means of which he conquered death itself. In God's kingdom, danger and safety often go together. There is danger because we are in the midst of war. But there is safety because Jesus has already defeated his enemies and he is with us.
## Reflection Questions
1.	What do you think about the statement that in God's kingdom safety and danger often go together?
2.	Have you been tempted to avoid using your gifts in the kingdom in order to avoid possible danger? Has fear kept you from using your gifts to serve? Explain.
3.	What fears are keeping you from being a more effective kingdom agent?
4.	What fears are keeping your church from being more effective in God's kingdom?
5.	What does it mean in your experience to submit to King Jesus?
## Action Assignments
•	Make sure fear of not having enough money doesn't keep you from tithing.
•	Make sure fear of being ridiculed or misunderstood or rejected doesn't keep you from taking the initiative to evangelize.
•	If you have a hard time accepting God's forgiveness for some sin, talk to a mature Christian about it.
•	Make sure fear of what people will think of you doesn't keep you from inviting fellow believers to your home for a meal so you can be a blessing to them.
•	Don't unthinkingly or recklessly throw yourself into dangerous situations, but when serving the Lord puts you in danger, do not be afraid!

