Ratification of Covenant (24:1-11). In the fourth and closing step of Moses’ authority and Israel’s covenant, Exodus 24:1-11 records the ratification of the covenant. This fourth step completes what began with the initiation of the covenant in Exodus 19:1 through the beginning of verse 8. Note in particular that Exodus 24:3 and 7 both echo 19:8 where Israel repeated in unison their commitment to do all that God commanded.
Beyond this, the last scene of this step describes how the leaders of Israel ascended Mount Sinai, saw God, and ate and drank in wondrous harmony with him. The wonder of this scene of peace and harmony with God was designed to dispel any hesitation the original audience of Exodus may have had. How could they experience peace and harmony with God? Only by acknowledging the abiding authority of God’s covenant law through Moses in their own day.
Now that we’ve explored Moses and Israel’s preparation for Canaan at Mount
Sinai by looking at Israel’s covenant in Exodus 19:1–24:11, we should turn to the last major focus of Exodus. An emphasis on Moses’ authority and Israel’s tabernacle appears in Exodus 24:12–40:38. These chapters support Moses’ abiding authority by focusing on the crucial role he played in establishing God’s tabernacle.

#### Israel’s Tabernacle (24:12–40:38)

Most students of the Bible think of Israel’s tabernacle as little more than a chapel for worship, but recent archeological discoveries strongly suggest that it was much more than this. It was the custom in ancient Egypt for Pharaohs to go out to battle with their armies. When they did, they lived in elaborate tent structures, mobile palaces as it were. These royal war tents consisted of covered inner and outer rooms that were surrounded by a courtyard. At these tents, armies would do homage to their king and would receive directions from the king. Along these same lines, Exodus presents God’s tabernacle as more than a chapel for worship. It was his royal war tent. And as such, it was where the army of Israel did homage to its divine king and where Israel’s divine king revealed his directives to the army of Israel.

Instructions for Tabernacle (24:12–31:18). The record of Moses’ authority and Israel’s tabernacle divides into three main parts. First, Exodus 24:12–31:18 consists of God’s instructions to Moses for the tabernacle. God’s instructions for the tabernacle begin in Exodus 24:12-18 with God’s call for Moses to receive the Ten Commandments on stone tablets. Then God’s specific instructions for the tabernacle appear in 25:1–31:17. These instructions give detailed descriptions of the tabernacle’s furnishings and architecture. God also dictated guidelines for the personnel and practices of the
tabernacle with directives for priests, artisans, and skilled laborers. And he gave direct instructions regarding the weekly Sabbath. The number and length of these details reflect the importance of observing certain protocols at God’s royal war tent. Then, after this main body of instructions, we find Moses’ successful reception of the stone tablets containing the Ten Commandments in Exodus 31:18. This marks the end of God’s instructions for the tabernacle.
Now, on several occasions in this section, God explicitly pointed to the fact that his directives were not just for the Israelites at Mount Sinai. They were also for Exodus’ second-generation audience. In places like Exodus 27:21; 28:43; 29:9 and 42; 30:21; and 31:16, God used several variations on the phrase, “a lasting ordinance for the generations to come.” This indicated how various aspects of his instructions for the tabernacle were to be observed by future generations. Of course, the point of these notations for the original audience was clear. They were to observe God’s instructions for the tabernacle in their own day as well.

> There are a number of parallels particularly in the technology of the way the tabernacle is put together as it’s described in the book of Exodus, how it can be put together with poles and stands and so on and then be dismantled and carried so that it becomes effectively mobile. There are parallels to that in Egypt in many different periods, but the most outstanding parallel is to the relief of Ramses II in his Battle of Kadesh in the Abu Simbel temple, which commemorates this battle of Kadesh, which he claims to have won but most scholars think he was, sort of, he was lucky to get out alive. But there’s a relief on the wall of Abu Simbel which depicts his own tent, his own war tent, and it has the same exact dimensions as the tabernacle with a kind of a square inner room, which must have been his throne room, and then a longer hallway, which was twice as long as the inner room, and outside of that is a rectangular court, much like the rectangular court around the tabernacle. Also, we can see in the relief that his four divisions of his army are placed in the four sides of his camp, much like as is described in the book of Numbers. The tabernacle is surrounded first by the Levites and then by four sets of three tribes on all four directions.                — Dr. Douglas Gropp

Failure and Renewal (32:1-34:35). After God’s instructions for the tabernacle, Moses recounted Israel’s failure and renewal at the foot of Mount Sinai in Exodus 32:1– 34:35. These chapters divide into three main steps. In 32:1-35, we read of the Israelites breaking their covenant with God by worshiping the golden calf at Mount Sinai. These chapters vindicate Moses’ authority because Moses identified himself closely with Israel and interceded for them. At the risk of his own life, Moses mediated and won God’s favor toward Israel. And God did not utterly destroy the nation. 
Then, the second step of this section, in Exodus 33:1-23, turns to the threat of God’s absence. Having agreed not to destroy the nation immediately, God commanded Moses to move forward. But God threatened to remove his presence because he might destroy Israel along the way. But once again, Moses identified himself with the nation, interceded successfully on Israel’s behalf, and removed the threat of God’s absence. 
The third step of this section, in 34:1-35, involves God’s covenant renewal with Israel. God confirmed that he would go with Israel toward Canaan by renewing his  covenant. And this chapter exalts Moses as Israel’s leader by reporting his effective intercessions during the renewal of the covenant.

Completion of Tabernacle (35:1–40:38). Finally, the section on Moses’ authority and Israel’s tabernacle closes with the completion of the tabernacle in Exodus 35:1–40:38. These chapters begin with a reminder of the weekly Sabbath in 35:1-3. Then God gave Moses the commission to build and operate the tabernacle in 35:4–39:43. Exodus 40:1-33 depicts the actual building of the tabernacle. The details in these verses demonstrate how the building of the tabernacle, God’s royal war tent, conformed perfectly to God’s earlier instructions. And this section ends in 40:34-38 with God’s blessing on Israel in response to the tabernacle’s completion.
This final scene of God’s blessing on Israel focuses once again on Moses’
authority. It encouraged the original audience to submit to Moses by observing all the protocols of God’s tabernacle, so that they too would receive God’s blessing. Listen to Exodus 40:36-38, the last verses of the book:

> In all the travels of the Israelites, whenever the cloud lifted from above the tabernacle, they would set out; but if the cloud did not lift, they did not set out — until the day it lifted. So the cloud of the Lord was over the tabernacle by day, and fire was in the cloud by night, in the sight of all the Israelites during all their travels (Exodus 40:36-38).

Moses closed his book with this glorious summation of Israel’s travels toward Canaan. He pointed out that God’s presence remained because the first generation submitted to Moses’ instructions for the tabernacle. The second-generation audience could see God’s magnificent presence with their own eyes. And if they hoped to keep God’s presence with them as they moved into the conquest of the Promised Land, they would have to submit to Moses’ tabernacle instructions — the instructions for the royal war tent of their divine king.
Now that we’ve explored some initial considerations and the structure and content of Exodus, we should turn to our third main topic: the major themes of this book. What are some of the most important issues in Exodus that impacted the lives of the original audience? And how should these major themes be applied to followers of Christ today?

## MAJOR THEMES
 
Throughout this lesson, we’ve pointed out how the book of Exodus was designed to highlight Moses’ abiding authority over Israel. As important as this theme is, we always have to keep in mind that it’s not the only theme in the book. While these Scriptures do build a case for Moses’ authority, they do this by drawing attention to a number of other issues related to this prominent, unifying theme.

> Exodus actually weaves so many different themes other than the authority of Moses together that we could summarize it in many, many different ways. But one of the most helpful strategies to summarize the main themes of the book is to explore how this book emphases the kingdom of God. Now, that’s a theme that runs through the whole Bible, and it even reaches its culmination in the New Testament, so it’s an important theme for us to look at in this book. Now, sometimes modern Christians miss this facet of Exodus, but we all know that Exodus deals with the time when God formed Israel into a bona fide nation at Mt. Sinai, and the time when he prepared them to become a kingdom in the Promised Land and later, then, throughout the whole world. And so, we can see this emphasis on the kingdom of God in the book, but one of the best ways to see it is to see how Exodus characterizes God. God is a primary character in the book of Exodus, and it has a lot to say about God, but it primarily emphasizes that God is Israel’s king. — Dr. Richard L. Pratt, Jr.

Exodus is the first book in Scripture to refer explicitly to God as king. In Exodus 15:1-18, after the Israelites crossed the Red Sea on dry ground, Moses and the Israelites sang a song to the Lord. The body of the song draws the experiences of the first and second generations of the exodus together. It focuses on God’s past deliverance of Israel from Egypt, and also on Israel’s future success in the conquest and settlement of Canaan. Interestingly, Moses’ last words at the sea draw both the past deliverance from Egypt and the future conquest and settlement of Canaan together under the kingship of God. Listen to Exodus 15:18 where Moses drew his entire praise of God together with these words:

> The Lord reigns for ever and ever (Exodus 15:18).

As this verse indicates, God’s mighty acts for both generations of the exodus displayed his glory as the divine king of Israel, the one who “reigns for ever and ever.”
In this light, it will be helpful to organize the major themes of Exodus by considering four ways Exodus emphasized God’s kingship in the days of Moses. First, we’ll explore God as Israel’s royal covenant keeper in Exodus 1:1–4:31. Second, we’ll see how Exodus gives special attention to God as Israel’s victorious royal warrior in Exodus 5:1–18:27. Next, we’ll look at the theme of God as the royal covenant lawgiver in Exodus 19:1–24:11. And finally, we’ll consider the theme of God as Israel’s present warrior in Exodus 24:12–40:38. Let’s look at each of these themes, beginning with God as the royal covenant keeper.

### COVENANT KEEPER (1:1–4:31)
Although the theme of God as Israel’s royal covenant keeper appears throughout the book of Exodus, it’s primarily emphasized in Exodus 1:1–4:31. These chapters rehearse events from before Moses’ birth to Moses’ rise to leadership over Israel. Listen for instance to Exodus 2:24 where we read:

> God heard [the Israelites’] groaning and he remembered his covenant with Abraham, with Isaac and with Jacob (Exodus 2:24).

This verse is important because, apart from a brief note that God blessed the midwives who feared him, this is the first time Exodus mentions God. So, from the outset, Exodus portrayed God as the royal covenant keeper, the one who “remembered his covenant.”
Whenever the Scriptures mention God and his covenants, they implicitly focus on him as Israel’s divine king. During biblical times, God covenanted with people in ways that were similar to how great kings in the ancient Near East made treaties with other nations. Today, we often call these international treaties “suzerain-vassal treaties.” In these treaties, greater kings, or suzerains, established solemn arrangements with lesser kings, or vassals, and their nations. The Israelites understood that, as Israel’s faithful covenant keeper, God was also their divine king. And he fulfilled his covenant with Israel’s patriarchs by acting in the days of Moses. So, God’s covenant with Moses wasn’t contrary to his earlier covenants with Israel’s patriarchs. Rather, it was in fulfillment of them. Listen to this emphasis in Exodus 3:14-15 where God revealed his name to Moses.

> I AM WHO I AM. This is what you are to say to the Israelites: “I AM has sent me to you... The Lord, the God of your fathers — the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob — has sent me to you” (Exodus 3:14-15).

Notice here that God told Moses to identify him to the Israelites in Egypt with three different names: “I AM WHO I AM,” “I AM,” and “the Lord.”
To understand how these names relate to God as the royal covenant keeper, we need understand that all three names are variations of the same Hebrew verb ָהיָה (hayah). This word is most often translated by some form of the verb “to be.” It’s easy to see that “I AM WHO I AM” — or “I will be who I will be,” as the Hebrew may be translated — and the shorter form, “I am,” or “I will be,” involve first-person forms of this verb. But the name translated “Lord” requires a bit more explanation.
The term “Lord,” translates the so-called divine tetragrammaton, the four-letter
Hebrew name of God that is often transcribed “YHWH”. Recent archeological discoveries have indicated that this term should be pronounced “Yahweh.” Yahweh is most often translated “Lord.” But it’s actually a third-person form of the verb “hayah” and may be translated, “he is” or “he will be.” In fact, following certain conventions of the Hebrew language, it is likely to mean “he causes to be” or “he will cause to be.” Along these same lines, “I AM WHO I AM” may be translated, “I cause to be what I cause to be.” And “I AM” may be translated, “I cause to be.”
Assuming this understanding is correct, in these verses the name Yahweh, and these associated names, directly pointed to the fact that God was causing his covenant promises to be. In other words, he was keeping his covenant promises to Israel’s patriarchs by bringing them to fulfillment.
It isn’t difficult to see why Moses emphasized that God was faithfully fulfilling his covenant promises. In Genesis 15:14, God had promised to deliver Israel from hardship in a foreign land. Moses’ audience needed to know that God was fulfilling this promise in their day. They needed to see that every blessing in their past, present and future was the result of their divine king keeping his covenant with their patriarchs.
In many respects, the same is true for followers of Christ. God keeps the covenants he made with Israel’s patriarchs in our past, present and future as well. Passages like Luke 1:68-73 teach us that the final fulfillment of God’s covenant with Abraham began in the inauguration of Christ’s kingdom, during his first advent. In addition, passages like Galatians 3:15-18 tell us that during the continuation of Christ’s kingdom we must continue to trust in God and his promises to Abraham. Also, verses like Romans 4:13 teach that, at the consummation of Christ’s kingdom, the glorious eternal reward we’ll receive in Christ will be in fulfillment of God’s promise to Israel’s patriarchs.
We are in Christ. Christ is the heir of Abraham’s covenant. And God will not fail to keep his covenant with Abraham. These and similar applications to our world flow out of every passage in Exodus that reveals God as Israel’s covenant-keeping king.

> The book of Exodus demonstrates that God is always faithful to his covenant, because even when the children of Israel rebelled against Moses and they did not honor what God had done with them in the past, God kept his promises to deliver them. God wouldn’t have given up because of their rebelliousness, but he had to achieve the goal that he had set to deliver them. And this goal that God has set for all of us to draw us closer to him. No matter how much distance we walk away from God, God tries and God keeps on drawing us closer to him. No matter how broken we are, he comes closer to us so that he can fix us and so that he can bring us back home. So, the book of Exodus, it’s a reflection of the life that God has called us. And he is there to deliver. In fact, the book of Exodus is the book of delivery. People have fallen and they need to be delivered, and we do that every day. And God
does that. He specializes in drawing us closer to him even when we are running away from his grace. — Rev. Dr. Cyprian K. Guchienda

In addition to the major theme of God as Israel’s royal covenant keeper, we should note the emphasis on God as Israel’s victorious royal warrior in Exodus 5:1– 18:27.

### VICTORIOUS WARRIOR (5:1–18:27)

Archeological discoveries in every major empire of Moses’ day show how common it was for divine and human kingship to be linked to victory in war. So, even a slight allusion to God as Israel’s victorious warrior was an indication that he was also Israel’s victorious king.
We’ll look at God as Israel’s victorious royal warrior, first, when Moses was in Egypt. Then we’ll examine this theme when Moses and the Israelites were in the march from Egypt to Sinai. Let’s start with Moses in Egypt.

#### In Egypt

This theme appears throughout Exodus, but we can see it especially during Israel’s deliverance in 5:1–13:16. God’s miraculous judgments against Egypt not only vindicated Moses’ authority; they also displayed God’s victory as Israel’s royal warrior.
In Exodus 12:12, God summed up the significance of his greatest judgment, the judgment of Passover, in this way:

>  I will pass through Egypt and strike down every firstborn — both men and animals — and I will bring judgment on all the gods of Egypt. I am the Lord (Exodus 12:12).

Notice that in this verse God declared, “I am the Lord,” or “I am [Yahweh].” Here again, God identified himself as the one who remembers his covenant by causing its fulfillment. As Israel’s victorious royal warrior, he was going to “strike down every firstborn [of] both men and animals.” In other words, he was going to destroy the Egyptians and their society because they had made themselves his enemies. And along with this human emphasis, God would “bring judgment on all the gods of Egypt.” He would defeat the false gods, the evil spirits that the Egyptians worshiped.
We can see this duality in Yahweh’s miraculous judgments against Pharaoh and the Egyptians. Most, if not all, of these judgments also brought victory over one or more of Egypt’s false gods. For instance, when Aaron’s staff became a snake and swallowed the snakes of Pharaoh’s magicians, it wasn’t just a victory over Pharaoh. It was a victory over the divine power symbolized by the cobra that decorated Pharaoh’s crown. When God turned the Nile to blood, he demonstrated his power over Egyptian gods and goddesses that were associated with the Nile, like Hapi, Sepek, who took the form of a crocodile, Khnum, and Hatmehyt whose symbol was a fish. The plague of frogs displayed God’s power over Hekhet, the Egyptian goddess depicted as a human with a frog’s head. No Egyptian gods have been conclusively associated with the plague of gnats. But scholars have made a number of suggestions such as Geb, the god of earth. This plague also may have served to humiliate the Egyptian priests and magicians. The plague of flies may have been directed against the god Khepre, who is often represented as a flying beetle. The death of livestock displayed God’s power over an assortment of gods depicted as bulls, such as Apis, Buchis, Mnevis, Ptah and Re, as well as Isis, queen of the gods and Hathor goddess of beauty and love. Both of these goddesses were depicted as cows. The plague of boils was likely a display of God’s power over Sekhmet and Imhotep, who were associated with disease and healing. The judgment of hail displayed God’s power over Nut, the goddess of the sky and Shu who held up the sky. The locusts were in defiance of Senehem who protected from pests. The judgment of darkness showed Yahweh’s power over the great sun god Re, or Amon-Re. Then the closing plague of death for the firstborn was an affront to Min and Isis, deities associated with procreation. As these associations indicate, God’s miraculous judgments in Egypt not only demonstrated his victory over his physical enemies, but also over his spiritual enemies, the forces of Satan.
We’ve seen the theme of God as Israel’s victorious royal warrior when Moses was in Egypt. But God’s victory over human and spiritual enemies also appears when
Moses and the Israelites were in the march to Sinai in Exodus 13:17–18:27.

#### In the March (13:17–18:27)

Of course, the fact that God led the army of Israel through hardships on the way to Mount Sinai reveals him as Israel’s royal warrior. But perhaps the best way to illustrate this facet of Exodus is to turn again to Moses’ song at the Red Sea. Listen to Exodus 15:3-4 where Moses sang:

> The Lord is a warrior; the Lord is his name. Pharaoh’s chariots and his army he has hurled into the sea (Exodus 15:3-4).

Here Moses explicitly identified Yahweh as “a warrior,” and then repeated that “[Yahweh] is his name.” This close association between God’s name and God as a warrior formed the background of the familiar Old Testament expression “Lord of hosts” or “Yahweh of armies.” As his name indicates, God, the royal warrior, causes the hosts or armies to be, and he defeats his enemies. In this case, he overcame “Pharaoh’s chariots and his army” by hurling them “into the sea.” Then, in Exodus 15:11, Moses also identified the spiritual side of God’s victory when he said:

>  Who among the gods is like you, O Lord? Who is like you — majestic in holiness, awesome in glory, working wonders? (Exodus 15:11).

God’s victory not only showed his power over the human army of Egypt, but it also displayed his triumph over all of Egypt’s false gods.

> What’s it mean that God is a victorious warrior? Well, in the ancient world it basically means that God is the Lord of creation and the true King, and that’s exactly what we see in Exodus 15. In 15:11 it asks a great question in this praise: “Who is like the Lord?” And the answer is, no one. There’s no one, and specifically, there’s no other gods or goddesses that are like God. So this is, when we talk about God being a victorious warrior, this is a powerful statement in a context where there were hundreds of other deities that were vying for the title of God. And basically, what the Bible does is really subtle. It asks the question, “Who is like the Lord?” And the answer is no one, with the point being: You may think there’s other gods, but at the end of the day, there’s only one being who’s worthy of the title God, and that’s the Lord. And then Exodus 15 ends with “The Lord will reign for ever and ever.” And that’s the kind of warrior that we want fighting for us.  — Dr. Brian D. Russell

The book of Exodus emphasized Yahweh’s victory over Pharaoh and his false
gods to give the second-generation audience confidence. God was able to defeat their physical and spiritual enemies too. They learned about how God had fought for their forebears in the past. In this way, they also learned how he would give them triumph in the future as they entered the conquest of Canaan.
In much the same way, as Christians learn of God’s great victory in Exodus, we can reflect on what the New Testament teaches about Christ’s victory. In passages like Matthew 12:28 and 29, John 12:31, and Colossians 2:15, the New Testament teaches that Christ acted as our divine royal warrior when he inaugurated his kingdom. But while Jesus defeated Satan and the false gods of the world, he also mercifully offered forgiveness and reconciliation with God to all who would surrender to him.
And, in passages like 1 Corinthians 15:25, Hebrews 1:3 and 1 Peter 3:22, we learn that Jesus is our royal victorious warrior during the continuation of his kingdom. Throughout church history we are to imitate Christ’s strategy of defeating Satan and other evil spirits in the world. And we are to continue to offer forgiveness and reconciliation with God through faith in Christ.
Finally, in passages like 2 Thessalonians 1:6 and 7, Hebrews 10:27, and 2 Peter 3:7, we find that, at the consummation of his kingdom, Christ will return as the divine royal warrior once again. But at his return, Christ’s merciful offer of reconciliation will end. Those who have refused to come to Christ will suffer the same fate as Satan and his minions — the eternal judgment of God.
Having looked at the major themes of God as Israel’s royal covenant keeper and victorious royal warrior, we should turn to a third major theme in Exodus: God as Israel’s royal covenant lawgiver in Exodus 19:1–24:11.

### COVENANT LAWGIVER (19:1–24:11)

As we saw earlier, these verses draw attention to Moses’ authority and Israel’s covenant law. In the ancient Near East, people believed that both human and divine kings revealed their wisdom through the laws they gave. So, it wouldn’t have surprised the original audience of Exodus that God was their royal covenant lawgiver. But, for us to recognize how Moses emphasized this theme, it will help to look at why God gave his law in the book of Exodus.
Every major Protestant tradition has spoken of three main uses of the law. The first is what’s often been called “usus pedagogicus,” the pedagogical use of the law. New Testament passages like Galatians 3:23-26, Romans 3:20, and Romans 5:20 and 21 teach that God uses the law to incite and expose sin. In this way, human beings are driven to Christ for salvation. Second, Protestants refer to what’s sometimes been called “usus civilus,” the civic or political use of the law. In this use, the law restrains sin in society by the threat of God’s punishment. But, as true as these outlooks are to the teachings of Scripture in general, the book of Exodus emphasizes what’s been called “the third use of the law.” This is sometimes referred to as “usus normativus,” the normative use, or “usus didacticus,” the instructive use. In this case, God’s law is the norm, or instruction, for those who are already under his grace. So, in the book of Exodus, God gave the law primarily to guide his people, Israel, toward his blessings.
This theme appears in many places in Exodus. But it’s especially evident in 19:1– 24:11, beginning with the initiation of God’s covenant with Israel and continuing through the ratification of the covenant. Listen to Exodus 19:4 where God told the Israelites:

> You yourselves have seen what I did to Egypt, and how I carried you on eagles’ wings and brought you to myself (Exodus 19:4).

We see here that even before the Israelites received the law, they’d already experienced God’s grace. In verses 5 and 6, God then turned to the requirement of Israel’s obedience to the law and the benefits of loyalty. He said:

> Now if you obey me fully and keep my covenant, then out of all nations you will be my treasured possession. Although the whole earth is mine, you will be for me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation (Exodus 19:5-6).

Having already received God’s grace, Israel would be his “treasured possession,” “a kingdom of priests and a holy nation” if they obeyed his law. Clearly, God’s law wasn’t given so that Israel might earn their salvation. The law was his gift to his people after he’d already shown them mercy.
A similar pattern appears in Exodus 20:1-17. In 20:2, God initiated the Ten Commandments with a declaration of his benevolence toward Israel, saying:

>  I am the Lord your God, who brought you out of Egypt, out of the land of slavery (Exodus 20:2).

Once again, we see that God’s mercy preceded his law to Israel. It wasn’t until after this declaration that God gave Israel the Ten Commandments. And, as a number of the Ten Commandments state explicitly, Israel would receive blessings for obedience to the law.

> Maybe some people think of the law of God as constrictive and antithetical to grace, but when we look at the way that God gave the law in the Old Testament, we can see that it was a gracious thing for God to give the law in the way that he did. What we see is that God gave the law to his people after he had redeemed them from bondage of slavery in Egypt. As he lead them out and powerfully intervened on their behalf, he then brings them into the wilderness and condescends to them and reveals his plan for how they are to live under the lordship and the kingship of God who is their great King. And so, the law is not something that God required his people to keep in order that he then might redeem them. Instead, the law was given after God redeemed them from Egypt and shows his people the way that they are to live under the lordship of God as great King, and how they are to live among one another as a redeemed people. And so, whenever you read about the law in the Old Testament, it’s already being given in the context of God’s gracious condescension to his people.  — Dr. Brandon D. Crowe

God also exhibited this pattern during the ratification of the covenant. In Exodus 24:1 and 2, he graciously invited the leaders of Israel to come up to him on Mount Sinai. In verses 3-8, the people pledged obedience to the law. And in verses 9-11, the leaders of Israel celebrated the blessing of peace with God, and actually saw God.
For the original audience, this emphasis on the gracious and beneficial character of God’s law in the past alerted them to their need to follow God’s law in their own time. The law was their gift from God in their current circumstances and in the future as well.
Along these same lines, as followers of Christ, every time we see God’s commands to Israel in the book of Exodus, we are to view them as God’s gracious and beneficial gift to us in Christ.
Now, we know that in the inauguration of his kingdom, Jesus and his apostles and prophets gave the church new revelations to help us apply Moses’ law to our age. But passages like Matthew 5:17, Romans 8:4 and Hebrews 8:10 make it clear that Jesus and his followers didn’t discount the authority of Moses’ law. And the same is true during the continuation of the kingdom. Today, we must not attempt to obey God’s law as if Christ has not come. But we must apply it today in the light of God’s further revelation in Christ. And, as we know, when Christ returns at the consummation of his kingdom, his people will be fully sanctified. Then we will obey the perfect law of God, written on our hearts, in the new creation.
We’ve looked at the major themes in the book of Exodus by exploring God as Israel’s royal covenant keeper, as the victorious royal warrior, and as the royal covenant
lawgiver. Finally, let’s look at the theme of God as Israel’s present warrior in Exodus 24:12–40:38.

### PRESENT WARRIOR (24:12–40:38)

>  The book of Exodus offers a very interesting take on the kingship of the Lord over Israel. Often when people study the Old Testament, they think of Israel’s first king as Saul, and he is the first earthly king, so to speak. But when you read Exodus 19:5 and 6, it talks about Israel being a “kingdom of priests.” Well, you can’t have a kingdom without a king, and so, really, the perspective of Exodus 19:5-6 is that the first king of Israel is actually God himself. And even though God is not incarnate in Christ in the Old Testament, he nevertheless makes himself visible as king and his kingship in Christ visible through these images of the cloud by day and the pillar of fire by night. The tabernacle becomes a symbol of Emmanuel, “God with us.” And so, God’s kingship is visible in these figures and symbols that he gives to Israel by which he shows his own rule and kingship through Christ over Israel. — Dr. Don Collett

We see the theme of God’s kingly presence most clearly in Exodus 24:12–40:38. This fourth major division of Exodus focuses on Moses’ authority and Israel’s tabernacle. These chapters rehearse how God gave Moses instructions for the tabernacle, how Israel failed at the foot of Mount Sinai, and how Moses led Israel in the tabernacle’s construction. Each of these events emphasized God’s presence with his people. In Exodus 33:14, God assured Moses:

> My Presence will go with you, and I will give you rest (Exodus 33:14).

The expression “My Presence” in this verse translates the Hebrew noun (panim), a term that is usually translated “face.” In a number of passages in Exodus and elsewhere, God’s “face” signifies his special, intense, attentive, and often visible presence with his people.
Although God is omnipresent, he devotes himself to his people in special ways throughout the Bible. In this portion of Exodus, God’s presence resided near and in the tabernacle. As we mentioned earlier in this lesson, the tabernacle was much more than a chapel or a place where Israel held worship services. Israel worshiped God at the tabernacle because it was God’s royal war tent. Much like ancient human kings lived in royal war tents when they led their armies into battle, God took up residence in his tabernacle to lead Israel’s army toward the conquest of Canaan.
Now, in Exodus 32:1–34:35, the presence of God with his people was seriously threatened. In this episode, we learn of Israel’s failure and renewal at Mount Sinai. When God first saw that the Israelites were worshipping the golden calf at Sinai, he threatened to destroy the entire nation except for Moses. But through Moses’ intercession, God relented and only punished those who had sinned. Still, God threatened to remove his presence from his people as they moved forward. But the thought of marching forward without the presence of the divine king was unthinkable. Listen to Exodus 33:15-16 where Moses said to God:

> If your Presence does not go with us, do not send us up from here. How will anyone know that you are pleased with me and with your  people unless you go with us? What else will distinguish me and your people from all the other people on the face of the earth? (Exodus 33:15-16).

Notice here that Moses asked God not to send Israel ahead “if [his] Presence [did] not go with [them].” He sought reassurance that all was right between them. And he asked God not to take away what distinguished them “from all the people on the face of the earth,” namely, God’s presence with them. In Exodus 33:17, God responded in this way:

>  I will do the very thing you have asked, because I am pleased with you and I know you by name (Exodus 33:17).

It’s no wonder then that Exodus 40:38, the last verse of the book, highlights God’s presence with Israel at the tabernacle:

> So the cloud of the Lord was over the tabernacle by day, and fire was in the cloud by night, in the sight of all the Israelites during all their travels (Exodus 40:38).

> God is present with his people. He’s present with Moses in the bush. He’s present with his people with this pillar of fire and this cloud, guiding them at night with the fire and the cloud during the day. And then as we move into the latter chapters of the book, the parts of the book that often get ignored, God gives them a tent, a tabernacle. And within this tabernacle tent he gives them the Ark of the Covenant, where God’s presence is symbolically there. And the thing I love about this is we see that God is a God who wants to be with his people, which, for me, foreshadows nicely what we encounter in John 1, when it says:
The Word became flesh and tabernacled with his people (John 1:14, literal).
God in the Old Testament wants to be with his people, and ultimately God sent his Son Jesus to be with his people in the New Testament.   — Dr. David T. Lamb

The New Testament applies this major theme of God’s special kingly presence to followers of Christ in all three stages of Christ’s kingdom. Passages like Matthew 18:20 and John 2:19-21 explain that in the inauguration of his kingdom, Christ himself was the supernatural royal presence of God with his people. In fact, John 1:14 draws an explicit connection between the tabernacle of Israel and Jesus’ first advent. Listen to this verse:

> The Word became flesh and made his dwelling among us. We have seen his glory, the glory of the One and Only, who came from the Father, full of grace and truth (John 1:14).

The expression “made his dwelling among us” derives from the Greek term σκηνόω (skénoó). The Septuagint, the Greek Old Testament, used this same term for the Hebrew verb ָש ַכן (shâkan) that appears in Exodus for God’s presence in his tabernacle. So, this verse indicates that Christ’s incarnation was God with his people leading them to victory.
In addition, passages like Acts 2:17 and Romans 5:5 teach that when Jesus ascended into heaven, he poured out his Spirit on followers of Christ. So, throughout the continuation of Christ’s kingdom, the Holy Spirit indwells his church. As God filled the tabernacle with his presence, the Spirit fills his people with his special, intense presence that guarantees us of God’s guidance and victory day by day.
And of course, New Testament passages like Revelation 21:3 also teach that Christ’s incarnation and the presence of the Spirit now are but preludes to the wonder of God’s royal presence in the new creation. When Christ returns in the consummation of his kingdom, he will make all things new. And the entire creation will be filled with the visible glory of our present warrior king.

## CONCLUSION

In this lesson entitled “An Overview of Exodus,” we’ve introduced some initial considerations to keep in mind, including its author, occasion, original meaning, and modern application. We’ve also explored Exodus’ structure and content by dividing the book into two main divisions. And we’ve looked at a few of the major themes including how several dimensions of God’s kingship are highlighted throughout the book.
The book of Exodus had tremendous significance for its original Israelite audience as they were encamped with Moses on the border of the Promised Land. As the Israelites contemplated the challenges of living for God in their day, Exodus called on them to reaffirm their commitment to Moses as the God-ordained leader of their nation. The book reminded them of Moses’ role in their deliverance from Egypt to Mount Sinai. And it reminded them of how God had prepared them for the Promised Land.
In much the same way, as followers of Christ today, the book of Exodus calls on us to affirm our loyalty to Moses’ authority, but in the light of what God has accomplished in Christ. As much as God did through Moses as the leader of Israel, the book of Exodus shows us how much more God has done through Christ. In Christ, God has forever delivered us from slavery to sin and the dominion of Satan. And in Christ, God has given us the presence of Christ’s Spirit and instructions to guide us. And in this light, the book of Exodus gives us countless opportunities to learn more and more about how we are to follow Christ as he leads us to our eternal inheritance promised in the new heaven and the new earth.


Dr. Scott Redd (Host) is President and Associate Professor of Old Testament at Reformed Theological Seminary, Washington D.C. Dr. Redd received his M.Div. from Reformed Theological Seminary and his M.A. and Ph.D. from The Catholic University of America. He has taught at Catholic University of America, the Augustine Theological Institute in Malta, and the International Training Institute in the Mediterranean basin. Dr. Redd has contributed to various publications such as Tabletalk (Ligonier Ministries), The Washington Post and First Things. In addition, he published Constituent Postponement in Biblical Hebrew Verse (Society of Biblical Literature, 2014) and Wholehearted: A Biblical Look at the Greatest Commandment and Personal Wealth (Institute for Faith, Work & Economics, 2016).
Dr. Robert B. Chisholm, Jr. is Department Chair and Professor of Old Testament at Dallas Theological Seminary.
Dr. Don Collett is Assistant Professor of Old Testament at Trinity School for Ministry. Dr. Brandon D. Crowe is Assistant Professor of New Testament at Westminster
Theological Seminary.
Prof. Thomas Egger is Assistant Professor of Exegetical Theology at Concordia Seminary.
Dr. Douglas Gropp was formerly Professor of Old Testament and Associate Academic Dean at Redeemer Seminary.
Rev. Dr. Cyprian K. Guchienda is Pastor to All Nations at Highland Park Presbyterian Church in Dallas, TX.
Dr. Gordon H. Johnston is Professor of Old Testament Studies at Dallas Theological Seminary.
Dr. David T. Lamb is Associate Professor of Old Testament at Biblical Theological Seminary.
Dr. Richard L. Pratt, Jr. is President of Third Millennium Ministries and Adjunct Professor of Old Testament at Reformed Theological Seminary, Orlando Campus.
Dr. Brian D. Russell is Professor of Biblical Studies and Dean of the School of Urban Ministry at Asbury Theological Seminary in Orlando, FL.
