# Study Guide 
# Biblical Foundations
# Module Three – The Gospel of Mark

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for this course’s final exam.

**********************************

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 – 22:55

Introduction

I. Background

      A. Author

  	1. Traditional View

  	2. Personal History

      B. Original Audience

  	1. Witness of Early Church

  	2. Details of Gospel

      C. Occasion

  	1. Date

  	2. Purpose


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. What evidence is given in the lesson as evidence that John Mark was the author of the gospel that now bears his name? 

2. What important apostle probably helped Mark write the gospel?

3. Note the important details about the life of Mark. Where was he from? Was he an apostle? Did he possibly know Jesus? What relation did he have with Paul? With Barnabas? With Peter?

4. According to the lesson, to whom did Mark probably especially write the gospel? What evidence supports this view? 

5. Who was Rufus, mentioned in the gospel of Mark? Why is his name significant? 

6. When was the Gospel of Mark probably written? Between what years? What arguments are given for this probable date?

7. What was the purpose of the Gospel of Mark? 

 

