## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 22:55 – 1:17:25

II. Structure and Content

      A. The Announcement of the Messiah, 1.1-1

      B. The Power of the Messiah, 1.14-8.26
  
  	1. Introduction

  	2. Near Capernaum 

  	3. Region of Galilee

  	4. Beyond Galilee

      C. The Apostles' Affirmation of the Messiah, 8.27-30

      D. The Suffering of the Messiah, 8.31-15.47

  	1. Preparation

  	2. Confrontation 

  	3. Experience

      E. The Victory of the Messiah, 16.1-8


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. Name the names of the five main sections of the Gospel of Mark in their proper order, as taught in the lesson. 

2. Explain how the Jews viewed Jesus in general. How does this contrast with the Old Testament prophecies of the Messiah?

3. According to the lesson, why did Jesus not speak clearly from the beginning about his role as the Messiah? 

4. Where did Jesus concentrate His early ministry? How did He show His power and authority?

5. How did the people of Nazareth respond to Jesus' ministry? What did the teachers of the law think of Him? What did Jesus' family think?

6. According to the lesson, what is the "centerpiece" of the Gospel of Mark? 

7. What kind of leadership did Jesus especially encourage? 

8. What does the lesson teach about the way Jesus actually encouraged opposition with the Jewish authorities? 

9. Mention some of the ways Jesus suffered for His people? According to the lesson, what was the worst part of the suffering of Jesus? 

10. Why does the lesson agree with the view that Mark 16 ends with verse 8? What arguments are given? What probable reason does the lesson suggest that the scribes might have had in adding to the ending? 


 
## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 1:17:25 – 1:54:21

III. Major Themes

      A. Suffering Servant

  	1. Jewish Expectations

  	2. Jesus' Ministry

 	 3. Proper Response

      B. Conquering King

  	1. Proclaimed Kingdom

  	2. Demonstrated Power and Authority

  	3.  Conquered Enemies

Conclusion


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. Describe the life of the Jews during the last centuries before Christ. Where were most of them living? What happened to those living in Israel?

2. Describe the expectations for the restoration of the kingdom that each Jewish group had during the time of Christ: 
	Zealots 
	Apocalyptic groups 
	Nomists

3. Name the two major themes of the Gospel of Mark.
 
4. Make sure you are familiar with the contents of each of the following Bible passages: 
	Mk 10:45
	Mk 12:30
	Mk 8:34-35
	Mk 10:27

5. Mention ways in which Jesus showed that He was the Suffering Servant.

6. Mention where the idea of the Messiah as a suffering servant was described in the Old Testament.

7. What response did Mark want to produce in the readers of his gospel? 

8. Mention ways in which Jesus showed that He was the Conquering King.

9. What was Jesus' greatest show of authority, according to the lesson? 

10. What was Jesus' greatest victory over His enemies, according to the lesson?  
