## DIVINITY
	
> When we talk about the divinity of Christ, or even more properly, the deity of Christ — the fact that he is fully God — we are talking about the central claim of the New Testament concerning who Christ is. What we are told is that Jesus is fully God and fully man. The moment we back off of either of those, we no longer have Jesus. The only way we can explain Jesus in terms of his deity is exactly as the Bible declares him. We are told that he is the Son of the living God. This is the most fundamental fact preached by the early church. And what we have, for instance, from the Apostle Paul — what he writes in Colossians — our assurance is that actually he (Jesus) is the great power over all things. In him all things are created. He has all powers under his feet. That can be said only of God. You take that out, we have no gospel, we have no Jesus, and we have no Christianity.
> 
> — Dr. R. Albert Mohler, Jr.

The Apostles’ Creed mentions the divinity of Jesus in these words:

> I believe in Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord.

Christians have always intended words like “Christ,” “Son of God,” and “Lord” to indicate Jesus’ divinity. 
For our purposes, we will focus on just two of the terms the Apostles’ Creed uses to point to Jesus’ divinity. On the one hand, we will look at the fact that Jesus is the Son of God. And on the other hand, we will investigate what it means for Jesus to be Lord. Let’s begin with the meaning of the term “Son of God” that Scripture applies to Jesus.


### SON OF GOD

The first thing we should note about the language “Son of God” is that Scripture often uses it to talk about beings that are not divine in any way. For example, the angels are referred to as sons of God in passages like Job 1:6 and 2:1. In some modern versions of the Bible, these verses are translated to say “angels” rather than sons of God. But in the passages from Job, the Hebrew actually says, “benay haelohim,” which literally means “sons of God.” And we find similar language in other passages.
The nation of Israel is also called God’s son in verses like Exodus 4:22, and Hosea 11:1. The human kings of Israel were also referred to as God’s sons in places like 2 Samuel 7:14, and Psalm 2:7. Adam, the first human being, is called the son of God in Luke 3:38. 
And as all Christians know, in many passages in Scripture God’s faithful believers are called his sons. We see this in places like Matthew 5:9, 45, Luke 20:36, and Romans 8:14, 19. As Paul wrote in Galatians 3:26:


You are all sons of God through faith in Christ Jesus (Galatians 3:26).

But if the title “son of God” does not in and of itself mean that Jesus is divine, why has the church made such a big deal about it?
When we look at how the New Testament talks about Jesus, it becomes clear that he is God’s son in a unique way.

> In fact, one of the most emphatic things that we find in the New Testament is that Jesus is the unique Son of God. That he shares in the very essence of who God is. Or another way of putting that is that Jesus is very God of very God. And we are the children of God by relationship, by adoption, but not by essence. Jesus is the eternal Son of God. He has always been the Son of God.
> 
> —	Dr. Thomas R. Schreiner

Jesus’ unique sonship is especially clear in the Gospel of John. For instance, in John 1:1-18, we are told that Jesus is the eternal word of God, meaning that he is both God himself, and the only begotten of the Father. We also see it in John 8:18-23, where Jesus said that as the Father’s Son, he had come from above, that he had not originated in this world. And we find it in John 10:30 where Jesus insisted that he and the Father are one.
But perhaps the most obvious place where John made this clear was in John 5:18. Listen to what he wrote there:

> [Jesus] was even calling God his own Father, making himself equal with God (John 5:18). 

This passage makes it clear that when Jesus spoke of himself as God’s Son, he meant that he was equal with God the Father. For this reason, Christians have rightly understood that when the Bible says that Jesus is the Son of God, it means that he is both unique and divine.
Jesus’ divine sonship is also mentioned in many other New Testament passages. We find it in Romans 1:3-4, and 8:3 where Paul taught that Jesus was God’s divine Son even before the incarnation. We see in Hebrews 1:1-3 where we are told that as the Son of God, Jesus created the universe and is the exact representation of the Father’s being. In these and many other places, Jesus is identified as God’s Son in a special way that indicates his eternal, divine nature.
This emphasis on Jesus as the divine and eternal Son of God is reflected in the doctrine of the Trinity, which states that:

**God has three persons, but only one essence.**

The New Testament teaches that Jesus is God the Son, one of the three persons of the Trinity. But what is his relationship to the Father and the Holy Spirit?
As we have discussed in prior lessons, the ontological perspective on the Trinity focuses on God’s being and existence. As the Son of God, Christ is equal in power and glory to the Father and the Holy Spirit. All three of God’s persons — including the Son — are infinite, eternal and unchangeable. And each has the same essential divine attributes, such as wisdom, power, holiness, justice, goodness and truth. 
By contrast, the economic perspective on the Trinity describes how God’s persons interact with each other. From this view, each one has different responsibilities, different levels of authority, and different assigned roles. For example, Christ has always been the Father’s Son, subordinate to the Father’s authority. Listen to what Jesus said in John 6:38, where he described his submission to the Father:

> I have come down from heaven not to do my will but to do the will of him who sent me (John 6:38).

**And he made a similar claim in John 8:28-29, where we read these words:**

> Jesus said … “I do nothing on my own but speak just what the Father has taught me. The one who sent me is with me; he has not left me alone, for I always do what pleases him” (John 8:28-29).

Throughout the New Testament the Son is subordinate to the Father’s authority. There is no conflict between them, because the Son and the Father always agree. But the higher rank belongs to the Father.
In a similar way, within the economy of the Trinity, the Son has authority over the Holy Spirit. For example, listen to Jesus’ words in John 15:26:

> When the Counselor comes, whom I will send to you from the Father … he will testify about me (John 15:26).

In other passages, such as Romans 8:9 and 1 Peter 1:11, the Holy Spirit is actually called the “Spirit of Christ,” again indicating that the Spirit is sent by Christ. 
These relationships are summarized in the identification of the Son as the second person of the Trinity. He is the second person of the ontological Trinity because he is generated by the first person, namely the Father, and he breathes out the third person, namely the Holy Spirit. And he is the second person of the economic Trinity because he holds the middle rank. He is subordinate to the Father, but he has authority over the Holy Spirit.
In the early church, the confession that Jesus Christ was fully divine was a critical aspect of the Christian faith. Those who confessed the Apostles’ Creed at their baptisms were not required to affirm all the finer points of theology with regard to the inner workings of the Trinity. But they were expected to proclaim the deity of Christ without hesitation. Even today, affirming that Jesus is truly and fully God is a hallmark of biblical Christianity.
Now that we have looked at the significance of the term “Son of God,” we are ready to see how the title “Lord” points to Jesus’ divinity.
