### LORD

When the New Testament calls Jesus Lord, it is translating the Greek word kurios. Kurios was a rather common word meaning ruler or master, and it was even used as a polite form of address, like the English word “sir.” As such, kurios was frequently applied to mere human beings, as in Matthew 10:24, Luke 12:36-47, Ephesians 6:5-9, and many other places.
At the same time, the New Testament also used the word kurios as a name for God, as in Matthew 11:25, Luke 1:16, Acts 2:39, and many other passages. Given this range of meaning, why should we think that the use of the word kurios in the New Testament implies that Jesus is divine? Why shouldn’t we think that it simply refers to his earthly authority or honor?

> The key to Christian use of the word kurios is the Old Testament. The Old Testament Scriptures were written in Hebrew. Yet, a couple centuries before Christ was born, the Hebrew text was translated into Greek. This translation is called the Septuagint. When Jewish scholars translated the Old Testament into Greek, they used the Greek term kurios 6,700 times to translate the sacred name by which God revealed himself to his people: Yahweh. This backdrop is absolutely crucial for understanding the New Testament confession of Jesus’ kurios. Although the term kurios by itself does not necessarily imply Jesus is divine, the use of this term against its Old Testament backdrop clearly implies Jesus’ divinity in a number of texts. 
> 
> —	Dr. Keith Johnson


> One of the most amazing passages in the New Testament is where it talks about “every knee will bow and every tongue will confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father” [Philippians 2]. And actually, Paul, at that moment is quoting from Isaiah, where it was a hymn of praise that everyone would confess that Yahweh was the Lord. Now, he’s deliberately taking that Old Testament passage and saying that instead Jesus Christ is the Lord. And at that moment it’s quite clear the New Testament is saying Jesus Christ is not just a master, he is to be identified with the Lord God of Israel. 
> 
> —	Dr. Peter Walker

Listen to what Paul wrote in Romans 10:9, 13: 

> If you confess with your mouth, “Jesus is Lord,” and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved… [F]or, “Everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved” (Romans 10:9, 13).

In verse 13 of this passage Paul quoted Joel 2:32 in order to prove that everyone who calls on the name of Jesus will be saved. But in this verse from Joel in the Hebrew Old Testament, the name of the Lord was Yahweh, the proper name of God. Put simply, when Paul said that Jesus is Lord, he meant that Jesus is Yahweh, the Lord and God of the Old Testament.
Other New Testament passages that equate Jesus with God in the Old Testament include Matthew 3, Mark 1, Luke 3 and John 1, where Jesus is the Lord from Isaiah 40 whose path John the Baptist has prepared. We see the same dynamic in Hebrews 1:10, where the Lord Jesus is the God that Psalm 102:24-25 credit with creating the world. The list could go on and on.
Now, this is not to say that every time people in the New Testament called Jesus “Lord,” they recognized his divinity. Sometimes they simply intended to show him human respect. But when the church formally confesses that Jesus is Lord, as we do in the Apostles’ Creed, we are affirming the biblical teaching that Jesus Christ is God, and that as God he is a full member of the Trinity, with the same divine attributes as the Father and the Holy Spirit. 
The divinity of Christ has all kinds of implications for the Christian life. For instance, it means that we should acknowledge and worship Jesus as God in our prayers and songs. It means that we should pray to him, just as we do to the Father and the Spirit. And it means that we can take great comfort in the security of our salvation, knowing that God himself has redeemed us from sin. These and many other practical concerns in the Christian life rest on the belief that Jesus is divine. 
With this understanding of the divinity of Jesus in mind, we are ready to turn our attention to the way his humanity is reflected in the Apostles’ Creed.
