## HUMANITY

In the last couple centuries, many theologians have readily accepted that Jesus was human, but they have questioned his divinity. But in the early centuries of the church, it was at least as common for people to question the humanity of Jesus. Influential philosophies of that day made it relatively easy for people to accept that a god could disguise himself as a human being. But it was very hard for them to accept the idea that a god could actually become a human being. Human beings were physical and emotional beings. In their estimation, God would not compromise his own glory and dignity by taking on a lowly, creaturely, human nature. Sadly, many modern Christians also have trouble believing that God the Son could come to earth and take on full humanity, with all its weaknesses, limitations, and frailties. 
To demonstrate that Jesus was a full human being, we will speak of three broad features of his humanity. First, we will talk about his human experiences. Second, we will discuss his human office. And third, we will say a few words about his human nature and its relationship to his divine nature. Let’s begin by looking at his human experiences that are listed in the Apostles’ Creed.


### EXPERIENCES

Several of Jesus’ experiences prove that he was truly human because only human beings have such experiences. Listen to following assertions from the creed:

> [Jesus] was conceived by the Holy Spirit, And born of the Virgin Mary. He suffered under Pontius Pilate, Was crucified, died, and was buried; He descended into hell. The third day he rose again from the dead. 
> These experiences affirm at least four aspects of Jesus’ humanity: his generation, his body, his soul, and his resurrection. We’ll start by looking at his generation, which included his conception and birth.


#### Generation

The Apostles’ Creed speaks of Jesus’ generation with these words: 

> [He] was conceived by the Holy Spirit, And born of the Virgin Mary. 

Admittedly, there were some very unusual details related to Jesus’ conception and birth. First, he was conceived by the Holy Spirit rather than by a human father. He was also conceived in a way that did not violate his mother’s virginity. We will speak of these details at greater length later in this lesson. For now, though, we want to focus on the basic ideas of conception and birth as essentially human experiences.
When the Apostles’ Creed says that Jesus “was conceived”, it has in mind that Jesus began in the same way that all human beings after Adam and Eve have begun: as a tiny baby in his mother’s womb. Passages like Matthew 1:18, Luke 2:5-6; Galatians 4:4 and Hebrews 10:5 indicate that God formed Jesus in Mary’s womb in the same way that he molds every human baby.
Luke 1:34-37 records this conversation between Mary and the angel Gabriel regarding Mary’s pregnancy: 

> “How will this be,” Mary asked the angel, “since I am a virgin?” The angel answered, “The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you…. For nothing is impossible with God” (Luke 1:34-37).

Mary herself recognized that to conceive a child in this way would take a miracle. And a miracle is exactly what she got. 

> What Jesus’ miraculous conception does is to ensure that he’s fully divine as well as fully human, but it does not make him less than fully human. It is true that the conception is a miracle, perhaps one of the greatest miracles that redemptive history has ever known. And yet, from the point of Jesus’ conception forward, his gestation and development in the womb is like any other human being. His passing through the birth canal: normal human birthing process. His being dependent on his mother for his nourishment and his feeding, and everything from having runny noses to having to have his diapers changed is ordinary, normal human experience. He is more than just human, but not less than fully human. 
> 
> —	Dr. Robert G. Lister

It is sometimes argued that Jesus could not have been truly human because he did not have a human father. But the very first humans didn’t have fathers either, or mothers for that matter. As Genesis 2 tells us, Adam was molded from the dust of the earth, and Eve was created from Adam’s rib. Neither of them had parents. Neither of them was born from a woman. But they were both fully and truly human. In the same way, Jesus was also fully human even though his conception was far beyond ordinary.
And from all that we know from Scripture, Jesus’ growth in Mary’s womb was also a perfectly natural event, culminating in his birth. He did not appear magically, or descend from heaven at the moment he was born. On the contrary, Matthew 1 and Luke 2 indicate that Mary’s pregnancy was at first undetected, but then became obvious. It even caused her fiancé Joseph to question her fidelity, until God told him the truth in a dream. And the final result was that Jesus was born as a real human baby.
	
> Jesus is fully and completely human. The miraculous conception of Christ in no way minimizes his true humanity. Jesus actually shows us humanity as it’s intended to be in the miraculous conception because we see in Christ that we are able to be fully human without being sinful, which is how we’ll be in heaven. 
> 
> —	Dr. K. Erik Thoennes

Having considered Jesus’ generation, we are ready to discuss how his body affirms his full humanity.


#### Body
	
Here we have in mind the Apostles’ Creed’s claim that:

> [Jesus] suffered under Pontius Pilate, Was crucified, died, and was buried.

In these words, the creed attributes certain experiences to Jesus that would only have been possible if he was truly a physical human being. 
According to accounts of Jesus’ arrest and crucifixion in Matthew 27, Mark 15, Luke 23, and John 18–19, Jesus suffered under Pontius Pilate in a variety of ways. He was flogged, forced to wear a crown of thorns, spit on, mocked, repeatedly struck in the head with a staff, and forced to carry his own cross part of the way to the place of execution.
Jesus’ sufferings, crucifixion, death and burial demonstrated that he was a real man with a physical human body — one that could be beaten, one that could bleed, one that could be abused by soldiers, one that could collapse under exhaustion, one that could be killed, and one that could be buried in a tomb when his soul had left it.
And having a real human body was critical because the justice of God required that a genuine human being suffer physical divine judgment to atone for the sins of humanity. We find this emphasis in places like Romans 7:4, Colossians 1:21-22, and Hebrews 10:10.
As just one example, listen to these words from Hebrews 2:14-17:

> Since the children have flesh and blood, he too shared in their humanity so that by his death he might … make atonement for the sins of the people (Hebrews 2:14-17).

As this passage makes clear, Jesus had to be flesh and blood, a physical human being, in order to make atonement for us. 
With this understanding of Jesus’ generation and body in mind, let’s look at the fact that Jesus’ soul completed his human nature.
