#### Soul
	
Scripture regularly says that human beings consist of a mortal body that houses an immortal soul. It speaks of our souls by many different terms, but the most common are “soul” and “spirit.” Based on Hebrews 4:12 and 1 Thessalonians 5:23, some traditions have maintained that “soul” and “spirit” are different parts of our being. But there are approximately 200 verses in which one or the other of these terms is used to refer to all the inner, non-physical aspects of our being as a whole. So, it is best to conclude that the words “soul” and “spirit” both refer to the same underlying reality that man consists of only two main parts: body and soul.
In Luke 23:46, Jesus spoke of his own “soul” or “spirit” as he was dying. Listen to his words there:

> Father, into your hands I commit my spirit (Luke 23:46).

When Jesus died on the cross, he indicated that while his body would be placed in the grave, his human spirit or soul would be in the hands of God the Father. 
As the spiritual side of our being, our soul is the seat of our consciousness. When our bodies die, our souls are separated from our bodies and continue in a conscious state. And the Apostles’ Creed explains that the same thing happened to Jesus when he died. Specifically, it says: 

**He descended into hell. **

Here, the creed states that when Jesus died, his conscious, rational soul was separated from his body. And while his body remained in the tomb, his soul descended into hell. Later in this lesson we will investigate the meaning of this line in more depth. But for now, we simply want to point out that by mentioning Jesus’ descent into hell, the Apostles’ Creed affirms that Jesus had a real human soul.
Finally, in addition to affirming Jesus’ humanity through references to his generation, his body, and his soul, the Apostles’ Creed also speaks of Jesus’ resurrection, in which his soul was reunited with his body.


#### Resurrection
	
The resurrection proves that Jesus was a real human being because it reaffirms that his full, glorified human existence included the reunion of his real human body with his real human soul. The resurrection of his body occurred when his human soul was introduced into his perfected human body. Yes, his resurrected body was different in some ways because it had been glorified and was no longer mortal. But this did not make it any less physical or any less human. On the contrary, as we see throughout 1 Corinthians 15, Jesus’ resurrected body is the firstfruits of the bodily resurrections of all believers. As such, it shows us what our own human bodies will be like in the future. 
Listen to what Paul wrote in 1 Corinthians 15:20-23:

Christ has indeed been raised from the dead, the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep. For since death came through a man, the resurrection of the dead comes also through a man… But each in his own turn: Christ, the firstfruits; then, when he comes, those who belong to him (1 Corinthians 15:20-23).

Just as Adam was the first human being to be created, Jesus was the first human being to be resurrected with a glorified body. Others before him had been brought back to life, some of them raised by Jesus himself. And Enoch and Elijah had even been taken bodily into heaven without dying. But none of these had received glorified, immortal bodies. 
But even though Jesus’ body is now glorified, it is still fully human — just as we will still be fully human after God has renewed our bodies at the great resurrection of the dead. 

> He was an infant baby. He was absolutely dependent upon his mother in his infancy. He grew — Luke tells us that he grew in wisdom, and in stature, and in favor with God and man. We are told that he experienced the same hunger we experience, the same thirst we experience, and on Calvary’s cross he experienced death as a human being experiences death. Now, it was far more. He was not only fully human, he was also fully God, but the reality is that Jesus is not only authentic humanity; he is perfected humanity. 
> 
> —	Dr. R. Albert Mohler, Jr.

Now that we have looked at Jesus’ humanity in terms of his experiences, let’s turn our attention to his human office mentioned in the Apostles’ Creed, namely the office of Christ.
