### OFFICE
	
Jesus’ office is mentioned in these words from the Apostles’ Creed:

> I believe in Jesus Christ. 

In modern Christianity, many believers are unaware that the word “Christ” is actually the title of Jesus’ office rather than part of his personal name. In this regard, the word “Christ” is very similar to words like “king” or “judge.” 
We will speak of Jesus’ human office in two parts. First, we will survey the Old Testament background to the office known as “Christ.” And second, we will explain how the fulfillment of this office in Jesus points to our Lord’s humanity. Let’s begin with the Old Testament background to the office known as “Christ.”


#### Old Testament Background
	
The English word “Christ” is a translation of the Greek christos, which in turn is a translation of the Old Testament Hebrew word mashiach or “messiah,” meaning “anointed one.” 
In the days of the Old Testament, the term “anointed one” was a broad term that could be applied to anyone whom God appointed to serve him in a special capacity. For instance, 1 Chronicles 16:22 identifies the prophets as anointed ones. Leviticus 4:3, 5, 16 speaks of anointed priests. And in 1 Samuel 26:9, 11, 16, David referred to Saul as the Lord’s anointed because he was the king of Israel. 
Listen to the way Leviticus 21:10-12 describes the anointing of the high priest:

> The high priest, the one among his brothers who has had the anointing oil poured on his head and who has been ordained to wear the priestly garments … has been dedicated by the anointing oil of his God (Leviticus 21:10-12).

As we see here, the anointing ceremony dedicated people to God’s service.
One of the most important uses of the term “anointed one” in the Old Testament applied to the descendants of David that served as kings over Israel and Judah. We see this in places like Psalm 89:38, 51, Psalm 132:10, 17, and 2 Chronicles 6:42. During David’s life, God made a covenant with David, promising to establish an unfailing kingdom on earth under the kingship of one of David’s descendants. Psalm 89:3-4 summarizes the Lord’s covenant with David in this way:

> I have made a covenant with my chosen one, I have sworn to David my servant, “I will establish your line forever and make your throne firm through all generations.” (Psalm 89:3-4).

Now, it’s natural to wonder why the sons of David eventually lost control of the throne, if God had promised it to them. The answer is that the blessings God promised in this covenant were conditioned upon the obedience of each of David’s descendants. This conditionality is mentioned explicitly in 2 Chronicles 6:16, Psalm 89:30-32, and Psalm 132:12. So, when David’s descendants rebelled against the Lord, they lost their thrones. 
For instance, in 922 B.C., during the days of David’s grandson Rehoboam, ten tribes were stripped from David’s dynasty and given to Jeroboam. We read about this event in 1 Kings 11–12. The tribes that followed Jeroboam came to be known as the kingdom of Israel, and the remnant that followed Rehoboam came to be known as the kingdom of Judah.
Later, in 587 B.C., even the kingdom of Judah was stripped from David’s house, when his descendant Jeconiah was dethroned and his kingdom utterly fell to the Babylonians. 
Around this time, many prophets foretold that God would send a great “messiah” or “anointed one” in the future. He would be a great king, descended from David, who would restore and reunite the kingdoms of Israel and Judah.

> In the Old Testament, the figure who became known as the Messiah was the king — was the king from David’s line. David was given a covenant by God, and in that covenant, he was promised that one day God would raise up a king who would have a special, unique “son of God” relationship — relationship with God, as his Son, who would reign forever on the throne of David, who would establish justice and righteousness. So really, when we refer to the Old Testament Messiah, we’re referring to a king — the ultimate king, the king who would bring God’s salvation and deliverance.
> 
> —	Dr. Mark L. Strauss

Many Old Testament prophets talked about the Messiah or Christ as a descendant of David who would return the exiles to the Promised Land and bring God’s greatest blessings to the restored nation. For example, we find these types of prophecies in Jeremiah 23:5-8, 30:8-9, and 33:14-17. We see them in Ezekiel 34:20-31, and 37:21-28. And we read them in Zechariah 12–13. As just one example, listen to Jeremiah 23:5-6:

“The days are coming,” declares the LORD, “when I will raise up to David a righteous Branch, a King who will reign wisely and do what is just and right in the land. In his days Judah will be saved and Israel will live in safety” (Jeremiah 23:5-6).

Through prophecies like this, the Old Testament encouraged God’s people to long for the Messiah — an anointed king in David’s line who would rescue them from their suffering and bring them into God’s glorious blessings.
With this understanding of the Old Testament background to the office of Messiah in mind, we are ready to explore how the fulfillment of this office in Jesus points to his humanity.


#### Fulfillment in Jesus
	
The New Testament speaks of Jesus as the Christ in over 500 places. So, it almost goes without saying that from a Christian point of view, he is the great Messiah that the Old Testament anticipated. But to remove all doubt, there are two passages in John’s gospel where Jesus is called “Messiah,” and where John explains that “Messiah” means the same thing as “Christ.” These passages are John 1:41, and John 4:25-26. Let’s look at just one of these to prove the point.
Listen to these words from Jesus’ conversation with the woman at the well in John 4:25-26:

> The woman said, “I know that Messiah” (called Christ) “is coming. When he comes, he will explain everything to us.” Then Jesus declared, “I who speak to you am he” (John 4:25-26).

Here Jesus explicitly admitted to being the Messiah prophesied by the Old Testament. And John explained that the normal word for “messiah” in Greek was christos, here translated “Christ.” This tells us that whenever we see Jesus referred to as “Christ,” we should understand him to be the Messiah prophesied by the Old Testament.
But how does Jesus’ role as the Messiah, or Christ, prove that he is truly human? Why couldn’t God simply come to earth in his divine glory and save his people? Or why couldn’t he send an angel to lead his favored nation? 
Well, according to the prophecies of the Old Testament, the Messiah had to be human because he had to be a son of David. As we have seen, God had made a covenant with David specifying that one of his descendants would rule Israel forever. And of course, all of David’s descendants were human. 

> God forms relationships with sinners through covenant. He does that voluntarily. He is not under any obligation to do so. The initiative is his. It’s a sovereign choice of God to enter into covenant with us through the mediation of his own Son. Once God enters into a covenant, he is then, of course, obligated to fulfill the terms of that covenant, whether those terms be for blessing or for cursing. He is not at liberty to break that covenant. 
> 
> —	Dr. Derek Thomas


> As surprising as it may sound, God truly obligated himself according to his decree. Whenever he makes a covenant, he is bound to keep its terms. He chooses to obligate himself in this way as a means to accomplish his eternal will for his covenant people. But even though the covenant binds him, it’s still an expression of his free will. 
> 
> —	Dr. Paul Chang, translation

In the case of the covenant with David, God obligated himself to send a human Messiah to save his people. And that Messiah was Jesus.
A second reason is that only a human son of David could be an atoning sacrifice for his people. As we have seen, Hebrews 2:14-17 indicates that the Messiah had to be human. And beyond this, Isaiah 53 adds the requirement that atonement be made by a human son of David. A third reason the Messiah had to be human was that he had to be the second Adam. That is, he had to succeed where Adam had failed.
When God created humanity, he set up Adam as the head of the entire race, and he appointed humanity to transform the world into God’s kingdom. But Adam sinned, plunging humanity into sin and rendering us incapable of performing our appointed task. Genesis 1–3 records this story, and Romans 5:12-19 explains its deep significance. The historical books of the Old Testament, in turn, record how fallen humanity continually tried and failed to build God’s kingdom throughout the centuries.
Still, the Father’s requirements had not changed — human beings were still responsible to build the kingdom of God. So, eventually the Father sent his own Son to fix the problem. The Son came to build the kingdom for us. But in order to build it on our behalf — in order to take our place — he had to be human himself. Through his righteous life, atoning death, empowered resurrection and heavenly enthronement, Jesus succeeded where Adam and the rest of us had failed. He became humanity’s second Adam. And when we are united to Jesus by faith, his success becomes our success, and his power becomes our empowerment. We are restored to the dignified, important role of building God’s kingdom.
So far in our discussion of Jesus’ humanity, we have spoken of his various human experiences, as well as of the human office of Messiah or Christ. At this point, we are ready to talk about Jesus’ human nature and its relationship to his divine nature.
