## WORK
	
For the last few hundred years, it has been common for theologians to talk about the work of Jesus in terms of two ideas. First, there is his humiliation, in which he humbled himself by condescending to take on a frail human nature, and to suffer on earth in order to redeem fallen humanity. And second, there is his exaltation, in which God the Father unveiled Christ’s hidden divine glory, and heaped additional honor and praise on him. These categories are not explicitly mentioned in the Apostles’ Creed, but they are very helpful ways for us to think about the work of Jesus.
As we consider Jesus’ work in this lesson, we will turn first to his humiliation, those things that hid or veiled his glory. And second, we will consider his exaltation, the work that revealed his glory and that will result in further glory in the future. Let’s begin with Christ’s humiliation during his earthly ministry.


### HUMILIATION

Jesus’ work of humiliation is mentioned in the following lines from the Apostles’ Creed:

> [He] was conceived by the Holy Spirit, And born of the Virgin Mary. He suffered under Pontius Pilate, Was crucified, died, and was buried; He descended into hell. 

In each of these works, the Son of God caused his glory to be veiled and hidden from sight, and subjected himself to suffering and indignity. Because the Son’s divine nature is immutable, it could not be humiliated. So, his humiliation was limited to his human nature. Nevertheless, because his human nature is perfectly united to his person, his divine person fully experienced the humiliation.

In this lesson, we will summarize Jesus’ works of humiliation under two headings: his incarnation and his passion. Let’s begin by looking at his incarnation, when he came to earth as a human being.


#### Incarnation

The theological term “incarnation” refers to Jesus permanently taking on a human nature. Literally, the word “incarnation” refers to “taking on flesh,” that is, a human body. But as we have seen, Christian theology has regularly maintained that Jesus also took on a human soul. So, when we speak of the incarnation in theology, we are generally referring to Jesus’ entire human nature. Scripture speaks of the incarnation of Christ in many places, such as John 1:1, 14; Philippians 2:6-7; and Hebrews 2:14-17.
John 1:1, 14 is probably the source of the technical term “incarnation.” Listen to what John wrote there:

> In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God… The Word became flesh and made his dwelling among us (John 1:1, 14).

Notice that John said the Son of God “became flesh” — the literal meaning of incarnation. His point was that Jesus took a real human nature, including a real human body.
In the Apostles’ Creed, the works associated with Jesus’ incarnation are his conception and birth. We previously spoke of these events in terms of Jesus’ generation, and demonstrated that they prove his humanity. At this point, we want to consider these same events again, but from the perspective of Jesus’ work as Messiah. Why was the incarnation necessary? What did Jesus accomplish by it?
Scripture teaches that Jesus’ work of incarnation accomplished at least three things: First, it gave God the Son the legal right to be the Davidic king. Second, it gave him the mercy and sympathy he needed in order to be an effective high priest. And third, the incarnation was necessary in order for Jesus to become an atoning sacrifice for sin. Let’s briefly consider each of these points, beginning with the fact that the Davidic king had to be a human being.
We have already mentioned that the messiah had to be human in order for God to keep the promises he made to David. So, at this point, we want to consider how Jesus’ work of incarnation gave him the right to David’s throne. The problem before us is that the legal right to inherit David’s throne could only be inherited by sons. So, Jesus could only claim David’s throne if he had a human father who descended from David. 
To solve this problem, Jesus became incarnate through the Virgin Mary, who was betrothed to Joseph. And as we see in Jesus genealogies in Matthew 1 and Luke 3, Joseph was a direct legal descendant of David. So, when Joseph married Mary and adopted Jesus, Jesus obtained the legal genealogy of Joseph, and with it the right to be the messianic king. 
Besides giving God the Son the legal right to be the Davidic king, the incarnation gave the him the mercy and sympathy he needed in order to be an effective high priest on behalf of his people. 

> The Bible tells us that Jesus’ incarnation made him a high priest who is able to be touched with the feeling of our infirmities. And that means that he is a more effective high priest than he would have been or could have been had he not known the fullness of what it is to be human and experience that with and for us. There are a variety of ways that that’s manifested. One is that Jesus in his own life and experience dealt with and encountered the same range of human problems in the fallen world that we do, that God in the flesh knows the same kind of heartaches and sorrows and disappointments and betrayals and wounds that anyone who lives in this fallen world experiences. This is not something theoretical to him, this is not something that he stood off in the deep bowels of space, in the dusty past of eternity and speculated about. It’s something that he came into the world in our poor flesh, in our poor blood and experienced himself. 
> 
> —	Dr. J Ligon Duncan III

The author of Hebrews discussed this aspect of the incarnation in Hebrews 2:17-18. Listen to what he wrote there:

> [Jesus] had to be made like his brothers in every way, in order that he might become a merciful and faithful high priest in service to God … Because he himself suffered when he was tempted, he is able to help those who are being tempted (Hebrews 2:17-18).

In addition to giving Jesus the right to be the Davidic king and the experience to be an effective high priest, the incarnation enabled Jesus to become an atoning sacrifice for the sins of his people. 
As we saw earlier in this lesson, Jesus had to be human in order to die in place of his people. But why was his humanity so essential to the atonement? The answer is that God had imposed human death as the penalty for human sin. Scripture teaches this in Genesis 2:17, Romans 5:12 and 6:23, James 1:15, and many other places. Beginning with Adam, sin spread to the entire human race, and it brought the legal penalty of human death. This is why only a real, flesh-and-blood human death could satisfy God’s requirement.
Listen to the way Paul explained the connection between Jesus’ humanity and our salvation in Romans 5:15-19:

> If the many died by the trespass of the one man, how much more did God's grace and the gift that came by the grace of the one man, Jesus Christ, overflow to the many! … For if, by the trespass of the one man, death reigned through that one man, how much more will those who receive God's abundant provision of grace and of the gift of righteousness reign in life through the one man, Jesus Christ… For just as through the disobedience of the one man the many were made sinners, so also through the obedience of the one man the many will be made righteous (Romans 5:15-19).

Over and over again, Paul emphasized that Jesus’ human righteousness was the counterpart and cure to Adam’s human sin. Paul made it abundantly clear that Jesus had to be human in order to fix what Adam had broken. He had to be human in order to take the penalty that God imposed on humanity, and in order to spread his righteousness to other human beings.

> Sometimes we as conservative, as evangelical Christians, so emphasize the deity of Christ that we forget that it’s really his humanity that saves us. Because Jesus became a true human being, he could suffer and die for us, for our sins. So, Jesus’ humanity is essential to our salvation. 
> 
> —	Dr. Mark L. Strauss

With this understanding of Jesus’ incarnation in mind, let’s explore his passion, the second aspect of his work of humiliation mentioned in the Apostles’ Creed.
