#### Passion

The theological term “passion” comes from the Greek verb pascho, meaning “suffer.” It refers to Jesus’ suffering and death, beginning the night of his arrest. Jesus’ passion is mentioned in these lines of the Apostles’ Creed.

> He suffered under Pontius Pilate, Was crucified, died, and was buried; He descended into hell. 

Most Christians are familiar with the story of Jesus arrest, suffering and crucifixion. So rather than explore those details here, we’ll focus on the reason that Jesus subjected himself to these events. 
With regard to Jesus’ suffering, Scripture explains that it was necessary to teach Jesus obedience, and to commend him to God the Father. As we read in Hebrews 5:8:

> [Jesus] learned obedience from what he suffered (Hebrews 5:8).

And as Peter wrote in 1 Peter 2:20-21:

> If you suffer for doing good and you endure it, this is commendable before God. To this you were called, because Christ suffered for you, leaving you an example, that you should follow in his steps (1 Peter 2:20-21).

Through his suffering, Christ fulfilled the Father’s will, and thereby commended himself to the Father. By perfectly obeying the Father, he earned an eternal reward — a reward that he now graciously shares with us. 
But Christ’s treatment under Pilate did not end with suffering; it carried through to his death by crucifixion. This is perhaps the best-known aspect of Christ’s work of humiliation, and for good reason: it was his death that atoned for our sin and accomplished our salvation.

> The death of the Lord Jesus for sin (that’s how it’s presented all the way through the New Testament) worked, if one can put it this way, because he became our penal substitute. “Substitute” means he took our place, and “penal” points to the fact that he took our place in enduring the judgment, the penalty, which all of us had merited by our own transgressions of God’s law — the penalty, that is, with which God had threatened us for breaking his law. God’s nature is such, I mean this is his holiness in reality, his nature is such that where there has been sin, there has to be retribution. And the wonderful, wise, loving way of salvation that God planned was to divert the penalty from our guilty shoulders, if I can put it that way, onto the innocent, flawless shoulders of his incarnate Son, who thus fulfills the pattern of the flawless animal sacrifice that was demanded all through the Old Testament. 
> 
> —	Dr. J. I. Packer

The apostle Paul often described the crucifixion as the very heart of the gospel. We see this in places like Romans 6:6, 1 Corinthians 1:17-18, Galatians 6:14, and Colossians 1:20. As just one example, listen to his words in Galatians 2:20-21:

> I have been crucified with Christ and I no longer live, but Christ lives in me. The life I live in the body, I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me. I do not set aside the grace of God, for if righteousness could be gained through the law, Christ died for nothing! (Galatians 2:20-21).

Christ’s death was the central work that accomplished our salvation. And for this reason, it has been the central fact of gospel presentations throughout history.
After Jesus’ crucifixion, his body was buried in a tomb, where it remained lifeless for three days. Being fully human, Jesus underwent the normal human experience of death. The Apostles’ Creed records this fact in the words he descended into hell. At this time, Jesus’ body remained in the tomb while his soul descended to the place of the dead.
Now, we should mention that modern theologians are not entirely agreed over the meaning of the phrase “he descended into hell.” Many churches today interpret this line to mean only that Jesus was buried. But it seems clear that this is not the meaning the Apostles’ Creed itself intended. For one thing, the creed mentions both that Jesus was buried, and that he descended into hell. To all appearances, these phrases are separate and consecutive items in the historical record. For another thing, while it is true that the phrase “hell” can simply mean “under the ground,” its use in Scripture and in the writings of the early church almost always refers to the underworld that contains the souls of the dead. We might think of this as its default meaning in the early church — the meaning ancient Christians usually had in mind when they used the word “hell.”
For these reasons, it’s best to conclude that the Apostles’ Creed intended to teach that Jesus’ soul really descended into the underworld between the time of his death and resurrection. But what was the nature of this hell?
In the ancient world, the universe was often described in the language of a vertical structure. The earth, where human beings lived, was in the middle. Heaven, the realm of God and his angels, was spoken of as being in the sky. And beneath the earth was a shadowy underworld where all the souls of the dead resided. In the Hebrew Old Testament, it was most commonly called sheol; in the Greek New Testament and in Greek translations of the Old Testament, it was normally called hades. 
In the Old Testament, the souls of both the good and the wicked were said to reside there as they awaited the final judgment. In the New Testament, however, hades usually refers to the abode of the wicked souls, as in Luke 10:15. Nevertheless, at least before Jesus’ resurrection, the New Testament also confirms that the souls of the righteous were in hades. Most notably, Acts 2:27-29 speaks of the righteous man king David as being in hades.
Now, this does not mean that everyone in hades or hell was treated equally. Jesus’ parable of Lazarus and the Rich Man, found in Luke 16:19-31, indicates that a great gulf divided the souls of the wicked from the souls of the righteous. And while the wicked suffered in torment, the righteous were comforted. In this parable, Abraham resided in the place of comfort. For this reason, theologians have often called this part of hades “Abraham’s Side” or more literally “Abraham’s Bosom.” 
The church father Tertullian, who wrote in the early third century, expressed the common belief in this division of hades. Listen to what he wrote in chapter 17 of his work On the Resurrection of the Flesh:

**That souls are even now susceptible of torment and of blessing in Hades … is proved by the case of Lazarus.**

And the church father Ignatius, writing in A.D. 107, had this to say in his Epistle to the Trallians:

**By those under the earth, [I mean] the multitude that arose along with the Lord. For says the Scripture, “Many bodies of the saints that slept arose,” their graves being opened. He descended, indeed, into Hades alone, but He arose accompanied by a multitude; and rent asunder that means of separation which had existed from the beginning of the world.**

So, when the creed says that Jesus descended into hell, the most likely meaning is that his human soul descended to the place of the departed spirits. Specifically, he descended to the region reserved for the souls of the righteous, and not to the region where the wicked are tormented. Jesus’ stay in this part of hell was a necessary part of his work because it subjected his soul to the judicial punishment of true human death.
Jesus’ passion shows us what it means to be truly human in a fallen world. If even our perfect Lord had to suffer as he opposed and remedied sin, then surely we who are imperfect will also suffer. In fact, as Paul wrote in 2 Timothy 3:12, suffering is guaranteed for everyone who seeks to live a godly life. But Scripture also teaches that when we suffer, Christ suffers. This means that he is sympathetic to our pain, and eager to comfort us. And as Paul taught in Colossians 1:24, eventually Christ’s suffering through us will be complete. And when that happens, he will return in glory and we will receive our eternal inheritances. Our suffering is not without purpose; it is a means God is using to bring about the full restoration of all creation.
Now that we have looked at Jesus’ work of humiliation, we should consider his work of exaltation, when his divine glory was revealed once again.
