#### Enthronement
	
The New Testament mentions Jesus’ enthronement at the right hand of God the Father in many, many places. The basic idea is that Jesus is our great human king, and that he has a throne in heaven that sits to the right of the Father’s great throne. In this scenario, the Father is the great high king or suzerain, and the Son is the lesser king or vassal that serves him. This follows the model of kingdoms in the ancient world, whereby lesser kings would rule over various portions of a great empire, and pay tribute and render service to the emperor.

> Normally when we think about the kingship of Christ, we think of that as something very exalted, high up there, and because Jesus is now at the right hand of God the Father, and he is the King. But we must remember that Jesus was exalted in his kingship in his human nature. That’s to say, in his divine nature, Jesus was always the King. He was always ruling as the sovereign over all things, but Jesus was given authority in heaven and earth in his human nature. And Jesus is the Son of David, and therefore the one who represents the nation of Israel, and the people of God. And the Son of David, like David himself, was a vassal king; he was a servant of the greater king, God the Father in heaven. 
> 
> —	Dr. Richard L. Pratt, Jr.

In passages that mention Jesus in his role as king, he is also spoken of as a priest who intercedes for his people. This follows the model of the ancient world in which kings commonly served as priests. For example, Melchizedek was both priest and king in Genesis 14. 
When Scripture speaks of Jesus’ position at the Father’s right hand, it sometimes emphasizes his role as our messianic king, as in Acts 2:30-36, Ephesians 1:18-23, Hebrews 1:3-9 and 1 Peter 3:21-22. At other times, though, the Bible highlights Jesus’ role as our high priest who intercedes for us. We find this emphasis in passages like Romans 8:34 and Hebrews 8:1. 
In both cases, though, the meaning is the same: Jesus has authority and power over all creation, which he rules over on behalf of the Father. And in that position, he brings salvation to his people, and ensures that the Father looks on them favorably.
After Jesus’ resurrection from the dead, ascension into heaven, and enthronement at the Father’s right hand, the Apostles’ Creed mentions the judgment Christ will render on the last day.


#### Judgment

When the creed says that Jesus will return in judgment, it states that he will come from there, that is, from his throne at the right hand of God. The idea is that Jesus is the human king over all creation, and that he will render royal judgment against those who have violated his laws and not respected his kingship and kingdom. We see this in Scriptures such as Luke 22:30, Acts 17:31, 2 Thessalonians 1:5, and 2 Timothy 4:1.
The final judgment will include both the living and the dead, that is, everyone who has ever lived, including all those who are alive when Jesus returns. Every word, thought and action of every person will be judged on the basis of God’s character. And the horrible truth is that every human being will be found guilty of sin and condemned to death.
The good news is that those who are united to Christ by faith will already have undergone judgment through Christ’s death, and will already have been vindicated by Christ’s resurrection. So, at the judgment, they will receive an eternal blessing and inheritance. 
But the bad news is that those who are not found in Christ will have to bear the full brunt of God’s wrath in their own persons. They will be cast into hell for all eternity.

> In our day today, the doctrine of the last judgment is not very popular. I suppose, though, things haven’t changed very much, for I don’t think judgment was ever attractive to human beings. I would argue that it is absolutely vital to proclaim the judgment — that we ought to proclaim that there is eternal hell for those who do not put their trust in Christ. 
> 
> —	Dr. Thomas R. Schreiner


> One of the reasons that we talk about hell is because it’s the truth. And we dare not escape the truth. And there’s a lot of half truth and sometimes even ninety percent truth, but if you’re going to evangelize well, and you’re going to evangelize with the truth, you’ve got to talk about ultimate judgment. So, we talk about hell and need to. One of the things we recognize about hell is it reminds us who is the judge. We are not; he is. It reminds us about personal responsibility. It reminds us about urgency. It reminds us about eternity. Lots of things that hell can come to us with that, simply, it’s going to be very difficult to approach evangelism minus hell. So, we talk about it. But remember, we talk about it most of all because it’s the truth and we do not want to escape the truth. 
> 
> —	Dr. Matt Friedeman
