# Study Guide 
# Theological Foundations
# Module One - The Articles of Faith

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for the final exam of the Theological Foundations course.

**********************************

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 - 25:31

Introduction

I. History

      A. Development

      B. Purpose

  	1. Scripture

  	2. Traditional Teachings

  	3. Apostles’ Creed


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. What is the importance of the Apostles' Creed, according to the lesson? 

2. What is the probable origin of the Apostles' Creed? 

3. When was the form of the Apostles' Creed as we know it today standardized? In what language? 

4. What was the "Old Roman Creed"? Explain its history and importance.

5. What authority does the Apostles' Creed have for the church? 

6. What was the view of Origen, Hippolytus and Basil, Christian writers from the third and fourth centuries, regarding the authority of the Scriptures and the authority of traditional church teachings?

7. What are some of the explanations given by theologians in the lesson that show why there was a need for the Apostles' Creed? 

8. Explain the illustration of the "links of chain" with regard to infallibility.

9. What were Cyprian's views of the authority of the traditional teachings of the church?

10. What were Augustine's views about the importance of the creeds of the Church, especially the Nicene Creed?
