## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 25:31-49:38

II. Overview 

       A. God 

  	1. Trinity 

  	2. Persons 

      B. Church 

  	1. Participation 
 
  	2. Preservation 

      C. Salvation 


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. What are the three main themes of the Apostles’ Creed?

2. What are the three statements that introduce each main section of the Apostles’ Creed? 

3. Is the word "Trinity" in the Bible or in the Apostles’ Creed?

4. Explain the teaching of the Apostles' Creed on the Trinity. 

5. What does the Islamic religion teach about Jesus?

6. What does the Apostles' Creed teach about the Holy Spirit? 

7. When the Apostles’ Creed speaks of the "holy catholic church," what does it mean? 

8. Make sure you are familiar with the content of each of the following Bible passages: Hebrews 10:25, Jude 3-4, John 3:16-17, and John 5:28-29.

9. When the Creed mentions the phrase "(I believe in) the resurrection of the body," to what is it referring?




 
## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 49:38-1:23:49

III. Importance

      A. Foundational

  	1. Standard

  	2. Logical Basis

      B. Universal

  	1. New Testament

  	2. Church History

  	3. Present

      C. Unifying 

Conclusion  


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. In what sense is the Apostles’ Creed "foundational"? 

2. What belief of Gnosticism was corrected in the Apostles’ Creed? 

3. In what way do the doctrines of the Apostles’ Creed logically lead to other valid doctrines?

4. What does the lesson mean when it says that the Apostles’ Creed is "universal"? 

5. What historical creeds were primarily based on the Apostles’ Creed? 

6. What organizations are considered "cults," according to the lesson, because they do not hold to the doctrines of the Apostles’ Creed? 

7. How should striving for unity be related to striving for pure doctrine? 

8. Make sure you are familiar with the contents of the following Bible passages: Ephesians 2:19-21, 1 Corinthians 13:2, Ephesians 4:11-13, and John 17:23.

