# Biblical Foundations - Module One - Why Study the Old Testament?

# Discussion Questions 

1. What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?
2. Name and describe two causes that can increase our sense of distance between us and the Old Testament.  
3. Explain some of the ways that Jesus used the teachings of the Old Testament in his own preaching and ministry. 
4. What should we learn from the teachings of Jesus and Paul about the relevance of the Old Testament in the modern world? 
5. Describe the significant challenges we face as we try to understand and apply the Old Testament to our lives. 
6. Is the Old Testament sometimes confusing to you? Gives examples and explain why?
7. How can you try to shorten the “distance” between yourself and the Old Testament?
8. How would you respond to someone who said, “Jesus’ teaching on such things as murder, adultery and love for enemies contradicts the teachings of the Old Testament”? 
9. In the Sermon on the Mount, why did Jesus keep contrasting what was said with what was written? In what ways might modern Christians be tempted to make errors like those that Jesus refuted?
10. What benefits come from acknowledging God’s unchanging nature as you study the Old Testament?

### REVIEW STATEMENT – INSPIRATION:

The Old Testament Scriptures often seem like foreign territory to you and me because they were both organically inspired and accommodated to the original Israelite audience, which causes much of the perceived distance. The Old Testament was written about a very different culture than current culture. Even today, you might hold different personal beliefs about the Bible than the Christian next to you. When looking at the broad topics that always apply to Christian values, it is easier to relate back to our own lives, but the more deeply the work is studied the less it seemingly has to do with us. There are differences between what New Testament Christians believe and what Old Testament Christians believed (Theological).

### CASE STUDY:

Steve had been a Christian for 25 years, and he taught an adult Sunday School class at his church. He always taught from the New Testament because he found the Old Testament much more difficult to understand. The sacrificial system, the wars against God’s enemies, the rules in Leviticus, the strange customs of the people, the enigmatic writings of some of the prophets — all these things and more made him shy away from teaching the Old Testament. He did read the Psalms for inspiration and the Proverbs for guidance. But apart from that — and a few key verses — he kept to the New Testament. When people questioned him about it, he would say, “Now that Christ has come, our focus should be on the New Testament.”

## Reflection Questions

1.	Evaluate with your learning community Steve’s view of the Old Testament in the previous case study. 
2.	Talk about your experience of reading and hearing the Old Testament.
a.	How often do you read the Old Testament?
b.	How often do you read the New Testament?
c.	If you tend to read one more than the other, talk about why. 
d.	Why do you think many churches preach more out of the New Testament than out of the Old Testament?
e.	What is the practice or tendency of your church in this regard? If there is a preference for one over the other, ask your pastor why.
3.	If you have problems with anything you’ve read in the Old Testament, talk with your learning community about what they are and why they cause you problems. Have each member of the learning community make an initial list of difficulties or challenges in reading the Old Testament. Then share the list of the members and make a group list.
4.	How does your view of the Old Testament compare with that of Jesus and Paul, as discussed in this lesson? Give evidence based on your actions.
5.	Restate from the lesson the view of the Old Testament that Jesus and the apostle had.


## Action Assignments

•	Keep track of your reading of the Bible. Make yourself a chart to keep track of the date and the passage read. (This could be part of your journal in which you write down your observations and what you learned from the reading. Also highly recommended.)The purpose of filling out this chart isn’t to give you a reason for pride or for shame but to help you discipline yourself for godliness. After several months, notice how much of your reading is in the Old Testament and how much in the New Testament. The chart could be very simple — something like this:
