# Kingdom and Covenant in the New Testament
### Lesson Two
### The Kingdom of God
## INTRODUCTION

Anytime you read a complicated story it’s easy to become lost in its many details. But one way to avoid this problem is to identify the more important parts of the story and then refer to them over and over. By keeping the main elements in mind, we can see how the details fit together. In many ways, the same kind of thing is true when it comes to understanding the theology of the New Testament. When we start digging into these Scriptures, we discover so many details that it’s easy to lose our bearings. So, we need to be careful to identify the main ideas in the New Testament and refer to them over and over.
This is the second lesson in our series, Kingdom and Covenant in the New Testament, and we’ve entitled it “The Kingdom of God.” In this lesson, we’ll point out one of the most prominent teachings of the New Testament: the kingdom of God. 
As we’ll see, the theme of the kingdom of God is so important in the New Testament that, properly understood, New Testament theology is kingdom theology. In other words, everything New Testament authors wrote was, to some extent, devoted to explaining and furthering the kingdom of God. 
We’ll explore the prominence of the kingdom of God in New Testament theology from two perspectives. First, we’ll look at what New Testament authors called the good news, or gospel, of the kingdom. And second, we’ll point out how the coming of the kingdom influenced everything they wrote. These two topics will help us see that the doctrine of the kingdom of God upholds every dimension of the New Testament. Let’s begin with the good news of the kingdom. 

## GOOD NEWS

Everyone familiar with the New Testament knows that its theology is very complex. But if there’s one New Testament teaching that everyone should try to understand and apply to life, it would have to be the gospel. In fact, many of us would agree that if we don’t understand the good news of Christ, then our ability to understand any facet of New Testament theology is severely limited. But this raises a serious question. Why is the gospel, or “good news,” so crucial in New Testament theology? Why is it obviously more than just one of many doctrines found in the New Testament? As we’re about to see, the gospel is so important in New Testament theology because of its connection with the broader teaching on the kingdom of God. And this doctrine of good news about the kingdom of God shapes every dimension of New Testament theology. 
We’ll look at the good news of the kingdom in three steps. First, we’ll consider the meaning of the good news. Second, we’ll explore the basic concept of the kingdom of God. And third, we’ll trace the developing significance of this theme in biblical history. Let’s begin with the meaning of the good news of God’s kingdom.

### MEANING

> The gospel of the kingdom is a way of speaking about the good news declared for us of the King, the Lord. In particular, as we think about the New Testament declarations about Jesus, this is the announcement that “the king has come.” But not only “the king has come,” but that the lordship, the kingship of Jesus has been declared, declared on the basis that his death and his resurrection have confirmed his kingship. So, there’s a sense in which the good news is a declaration of something that has happened already. It has implications for how we live. But the good news is that Jesus has come; he has defeated death rather mysteriously by dying… There is a sense, therefore, God declares to us this good news as already having occurred. There are, however, promises still to be fulfilled in that good news will have implications for eternity.
— Dr. Richard Lints 

In Luke 4:43, Jesus summarized the purpose of his ministry in this way:

> I must proclaim the good news of the kingdom of God (Luke 4:43).

Although the words “good news” only appear once in Luke 4:43, the concept of the good news is actually indicated twice in this verse. The phrase “good news” comes from the Greek noun euangelion, a term that occurs some 76 times in the New Testament. The etymology of euangelion indicates that it means something like a “good announcement,” or a “good message.” 
But notice that in this verse Jesus also said he “must proclaim the good news.” The Greek verb translated, “proclaim” is euangelizo. This term comes from the same family of Greek terms as euangelion, and means “to proclaim or to announce good news.” It appears some 54 times in the New Testament. The frequency of these terms points to how important this concept was for New Testament authors. 
Many Evangelicals today think of the good news, or gospel, as an explanation of the steps an individual must take to find salvation in Christ. But this wasn’t the idea that Jesus had in mind. As much as we should be ready to share how to become followers of Christ, the good news in the Scriptures is about something much more significant. As we’ll see, rather than referring to the salvation of any individual or group of people, the gospel is the good news of victory for the kingdom of God. 
To make sense of this, we need to realize that the authors of the New Testament drew the expression, “proclaim the good news” from the Septuagint, the Greek translation of the Old Testament. The Septuagint uses the same verb we mentioned earlier, euangelizo, some 20 times. This word translated the Hebrew verb basar, meaning “to bring or announce good news.” But, passages like 1 Samuel 31:9 and 2 Samuel 18:19 indicate that when these words were used in reference to kings and kingdoms, they signified the good news of victory in battle. This observation is important because the “good news” in the New Testament is so often associated with victory for God’s kingdom. In effect, in Luke 4:43, when Jesus said:

> I must proclaim the good news of the kingdom of God (Luke 4:43).

We may actually translate this statement along these lines:

> I must proclaim the good news of [victory for] the kingdom of God (Luke 4:43).

When the New Testament speaks of the good news of victory for God’s kingdom, it refers to a very special kind of victory, as we’ll see later in this lesson. So, even though it may seem odd at first, we should acknowledge that the basic concept of the good news or gospel in the New Testament is the good news of “[victory for]” the kingdom of God. 
Having seen that the good news of the kingdom means the good news of victory for the kingdom of God, we’re now ready to explore the basic concept of the kingdom of God itself. 


### KINGDOM OF GOD 

The kingdom of God is specifically associated with the gospel at least seven times in the New Testament. We see the expression “the good news of the kingdom,” with only slight variations, in Matthew 4:23; 9:35; and 24:14; in Luke 4:43; 8:1; and 16:16; and in Acts 8:12. This frequency points to the importance of connecting the gospel — or the message of victory — with God’s kingdom. But to understand this, we must first understand what Jesus and his followers meant when they spoke of the kingdom of God. 

> The kingdom of God is God’s rule over God’s people in God’s place. We see that right at the start of the Bible in Genesis 1 and 2 where God’s people, Adam and Eve, are in a relationship with God, God is the ruler, and they are in God’s place in the Garden of Eden. Then, through sin, that’s messed up, but God reconstitutes his kingdom, first through Abraham and then Abraham’s descendants, and then finally through Moses after the exodus with the nation of Israel. This is God’s rule over God’s people Israel and ultimately in God’s place, the land of Canaan. But then we see that trajectory fulfilled even more fully with the coming of Christ, and we see that God rules through Christ as his king, his appointed king. And God’s people consist of Jews and Gentiles, people from all nations and all tribes and languages, but God’s place is the New Jerusalem, our heavenly home, rather than a geographical location… So, in the New Testament we see that the kingdom of God exists now through the reign of Christ over his people from every tribe, nation and language, scattered throughout the world and not located in one particular place, geographical place, but located in heaven, our spiritual home. But then, the New Testament gives us a glimpse, too, of what the kingdom of God will be like when Jesus returns, and while that kingdom now is somewhat hidden in this world, it will be seen clearly when Christ returns; every knee shall bow, every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, and God will reign perfectly through his king, Christ, over his people who know him and call him Father in a heavenly New Jerusalem.
— Dr. Constantine R. Campbell 

Scripture refers to the kingdom of God in two primary ways. On the one side, it often speaks of God’s kingdom in terms of God’s unwavering sovereignty or his unchanging rule over all of creation. It also refers to his unfolding kingdom and the way God has revealed his kingship throughout human history. Let’s look first at his unwavering sovereignty. 

#### Unwavering Sovereignty

Passages like 1 Chronicles 29:11 and 1 Timothy 6:15 speak of the entire creation as God’s kingdom because God always has ruled and always will rule over all that he has made. We need to keep in mind that the Scriptures speak of God’s sovereignty as taking place on two levels: both in heaven and on earth.
In regard to heaven, Scripture speaks of God’s kingship in places like 1 Kings 8:27. In this verse, Solomon made it clear that “the heavens, even the highest heaven,” is a created place that “cannot contain [God].” But God still condescends and reveals himself before his creatures there. 
Passages like Isaiah 6:1; 2 Chronicles 18:18; Job 1:6; Psalm 82:1; and Daniel 7:9-10; as well as New Testament passages like Luke 22:30; and Revelation 4–6 indicate that heaven is God’s palace above the visible world where all kinds of activities take place. As God is enthroned in heaven, he receives reports, hears prayers, deliberates, makes plans, and issues royal decrees. He directs spiritual creatures to do his bidding on earth. On occasion, he even gives specially chosen human beings access to his palace through visions, and commissions them to his service. In his heavenly court he declares guilt and innocence, and sentences spiritual creatures, individual human beings, and nations according to his justice and mercy. But God’s heavenly actions don’t just direct his kingdom in heaven. He is also sovereign in the lower realms of his creation — on the earth. 
Although the Scriptures speak of the kingdom of God as God’s unwavering sovereignty in both heaven and earth, when Jesus and New Testament authors referred to the kingdom of God on earth, they had in mind what we’ve called God’s unfolding kingdom. And it’s in this earthly realm that we can see how God reveals his kingdom throughout human history.

#### Unfolding Kingdom

Now, as we’ve just said, God has always been in full control of his creation and always will be. But the unfolding kingdom of God refers to a particular way that God reveals, displays, or demonstrates his sovereignty over creation throughout history. So, while Scripture confirms how God revealed his kingship in heaven, biblical authors give most of their attention to explaining how God unfolded his kingship on earth. 
In the beginning, God visibly displayed his kingship in the Garden of Eden. He put the first human beings in that sacred garden and commissioned them to extend his visible kingdom throughout the world. They were to fill and subdue the earth as royal and priestly images of God. But Satan led Adam and Eve into a major setback for the kingdom. In response, God cursed his creation and made humanity’s task more difficult. He divided humanity into two rival factions: those who served God and those who continued to join Satan’s rebellion against God. 
This rivalry took many forms throughout biblical history and led to many challenges for God’s kingdom. But the Scriptures indicate time and again that in the end God will have victory over all who have opposed him. His image will succeed in filling and having dominion over the earth, and the wonders of God’s kingdom will be revealed everywhere. And at that time, God’s victory over all rebellion will be so great that every creature will acknowledge him as the King of creation. As the apostle Paul described in Philippians 2:10-11:

> At the name of Jesus every knee should bow, in heaven and on earth and under the earth, and every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father (Philippians 2:10-11). 

This glorious vision of the goal of history is the victory that Jesus and his followers announced as, “the good news of the kingdom of God.”
Now that we’ve sketched the basic concept of the good news of the kingdom by looking at both the good news and the kingdom of God, we should turn to the developing significance of this proclamation of victory for God’s kingdom. 

### DEVELOPING SIGNIFICANCE 

The good news of victory for the kingdom is so thoroughly woven into the fabric of New Testament theology that it appears explicitly or implicitly everywhere in the New Testament. By the time the New Testament was written, the hope of victory for God’s kingdom had developed so much significance that it permeated every dimension of New Testament theology. 
There are many ways we could trace the developing significance of the kingdom of God in New Testament theology, but for our purposes we’ll look at just two aspects. First, we’ll consider Israel’s failures leading up to the days of the New Testament. And second, we’ll investigate Israel’s hopes for the kingdom prior to Christ’s arrival. Let’s think first about Israel’s failures. 

#### Israel’s Failures

After sin brought creation and the human race under a curse, God chose Abraham and his descendants to fulfill the kingdom commission he had first given to Adam and Eve. God promised to multiply the family of Abraham. And he gave Abraham’s descendants the Promised Land as the starting point for spreading God’s blessings throughout the world. In the days of Moses and Joshua, God furthered the Israelites’ privileges and responsibilities by giving them victory over the Canaanites and over the satanic spirits the Canaanites served. Later on, David, Solomon and a few other kings of Israel and Judah had significant successes in extending God’s kingdom to other nations. In fact, at the height of Solomon’s reign, Israel was one of the world’s most glorious empires.
Despite these privileges, every generation of Abraham’s descendants failed God in one way or another. But God showed patience and enabled them to move forward despite their sins. Sadly, once God’s people became their own kingdom, with a royal dynasty and a temple in the capital city, Israel’s failures became so flagrant that God turned in judgment against them. He called for the evil empires of Assyria and Babylon to conquer Israel in war. These severe defeats finally removed the house of David, decimated the temple, destroyed Jerusalem and sent most Israelites into exile. The Promised Land was left in ruins. And at the end of the Old Testament, the accomplishments of God’s kingdom seemed to have all but disappeared. By the time of the New Testament, God’s kingdom in Israel had suffered under the tyranny of Gentile nations and the false satanic gods they served for more than 500 years.
Unfortunately, modern Christians are so far removed from these experiences that most of us are unaware of how much the defeat of God’s kingdom in the Old Testament impacted on the theology of the New Testament. But, Israel’s subjection to Gentile nations weighed heavily on the minds of Jews in the first century, including Jesus’ followers. First century Jews wondered, was the exile the end of God’s visible kingdom? Was there any hopeful good news for the kingdom of God? This climate led New Testament authors to insist that the kingdom of God had not ended. All was not lost. Jesus of Nazareth had proclaimed the good news that the exile would end. And God’s victorious kingdom would be established throughout the world in Christ, in spite of Israel’s failures. 
Now that we’ve seen the developing significance of the kingdom through Israel’s failures, we’re ready to look at Israel’s hopes for God’s kingdom after the exile. 

#### Israel’s Hopes

In the Old Testament, God spoke through his prophets to warn Israel of their impending defeat and exile because of their unfaithfulness. But, in his mercy, he also inspired the prophets to call those in exile to repent in hopes of a great victory. These prophecies were complex, but in general terms, Israel hoped for the time when God would defeat his enemies and deliver his people into the blessings of his glorious, worldwide kingdom. 
We can see these hopes many places in Old Testament prophecy, but for the sake of time, we’ll consider just two verses from a well-known prophecy in Isaiah 52. First, in Isaiah 52:7 we read:

> How beautiful on the mountains are the feet of those who bring good news, who proclaim peace, who bring good tidings, who proclaim salvation, who say to Zion, “Your God reigns!” (Isaiah 52:7).

This verse is important for us because it explicitly mentions the good news of victory for God’s kingdom. It also closely parallels Isaiah 40:9 where Isaiah made a similar statement. The larger contexts of these two passages indicate that the “good news” refers to the unprecedented victory of God’s kingdom following the end of Israel’s exile. These hopeful predictions permeated the theological reflections of the vast majority of Jews in the first century. And not surprisingly, they also permeate the theology of the New Testament. 

> The Old Testament narrative as a whole is dominated by the theme of exile. It goes back to the Garden of Eden with Adam and Eve, and that’s just recapitulated in Israel’s own history. And so, this sort of depressing turn of events, which looms so large in the Old Testament narrative, naturally calls forth a desire for some hope beyond exile. So, we have plenty of near-term prophecies, particularly in Isaiah, that God will restore his people, but when you tie that back into the creation narrative, you realize that mere restoration to land is never going to be enough to undo the primal damage done in the beginning, or shortly after the beginning… And so, it’s quite natural to find in the Old Testament prophets a yearning for near-term deliverance for Israel perhaps at the hand of a particularly gifted king, but also ultimate deliverance from some ultimate kingly representative of God’s people.
— Dr. Sean McDonough 

A closer look at Isaiah 52:7 highlights four features related to Israel’s hopes for the victory of God’s kingdom.
First, Isaiah said that messengers would “bring good news” and “bring good tidings” to Zion. Both of these phrases translate the Hebrew verb basar, which the Septuagint translates with euangelizo. As we saw earlier, this same terminology is used in the New Testament for the good news of victory for God’s kingdom in Christ. 
Second, we see Isaiah 52:7 quoted in Romans 10:15. Here, Paul indicated that Christian preaching fulfilled Isaiah’s prediction of messengers announcing good news at the end of Israel’s exile. 
Third, Isaiah predicted that the good news would be a proclamation of “peace” and “salvation.” In Ephesians 6:15, Paul referred to the Christian “gospel of peace” and in Ephesians 1:13 he mentioned “the gospel of your salvation.”
And fourth, the last line of this verse summarizes the good news when it declares, “Your God reigns!” This message forms the basis of the gospel that Jesus and the New Testament authors repeatedly referred to as “the good news of the kingdom” — or reign — “of God.” 
Now that we’ve seen how Isaiah prophesied about the coming of Israel’s hopes in Isaiah 52:7, let’s look at verse 10 of the same chapter. Here, Isaiah predicted the two sides of victory that Israel longed to see. First, he anticipated the defeat of God’s enemies.
The defeat of God’s enemies appears explicitly in the first half of Isaiah 52:10 where Isaiah said: 

> The Lord will lay bare his holy arm in the sight of all the nations (Isaiah 52:10).

Here we see that God will “lay bare his holy arm,” meaning his arm of strength in war to defeat his enemies. 
Of course, everyone familiar with the Old Testament knows that God defeated enemies many times. So, what made this prediction about God’s victory so special? In this verse, Isaiah predicted that God would defeat his enemies “in the sight of all the nations.” In other words, Isaiah predicted that after Israel’s exile, God will completely defeat all of his enemies everywhere. He will disempower them, remove them from the earth, and send them to eternal judgment. 
Second, the last half of Isaiah 52:10 tells us that God’s victory will also result in the deliverance of God’s people into the blessings of his kingdom. Listen to this part of Isaiah 52:10:

> All the ends of the earth will see the salvation of our God (Isaiah 52:10).

We know that God delivered his people repeatedly in the Old Testament. But in the deliverance that Isaiah predicted here, “all the ends of the earth” will see it. Just as the defeat of God’s enemies will be universal, his deliverance will be worldwide and final. In the end, God will deliver his people into his kingdom of joy, love, righteousness, peace, prosperity, and endless delight in his glorious presence. 
We’ll look more closely at these two aspects of God’s victory later in our lesson, but as these verses illustrate, the prophecies of the coming kingdom are seen throughout the Old Testament.
Unfortunately, for over 2,000 years, traditional Christian theology has obscured the prominence of the kingdom in the New Testament. At different times in the history of the church, Christians have rightly emphasized a variety of theological outlooks in response to various issues. But we must always remind ourselves that when the New Testament was written, the defeat of God’s kingdom weighed heavily on Jesus’ followers. Nothing was more important to them than their belief that God’s kingdom would rise to unprecedented victory in Jesus. And for this reason, New Testament theology is cast within the framework of the good news of the kingdom of God. 
So far in this lesson on the kingdom of God, we’ve introduced the prominent theme of the good news of the kingdom in New Testament theology. Now, we should turn to our second main topic: how the coming of the kingdom shaped the theology of the New Testament
