SIMPLICITY
	
You will recall that when we defined the doctrine of the Trinity in a prior lesson, we stated it this way: God has three persons, but only one essence. We also said that the term “person” refers to a distinct, self-aware personality, and that the term “essence” refers to God's fundamental nature, or the substance of which he consists. Well, when we speak of God’s simplicity, it is his essence that we have in mind — his fundamental nature, the substance that makes up his being.
Now, theologians use terms like “simple” and “simplicity” in a rather technical way. We are not saying that God is simple in the sense that he is easy to understand. Instead, we mean that his essence is not a composite of different substances but a unified whole consisting of only one substance.
We can illustrate this idea of simplicity by comparing pure water to mud. On the one hand, water may be viewed as a simple substance. It is composed entirely of water, and nothing else. But if we add dirt to our pure water, it turns into mud. Mud is a complex substance because it is composed of two distinct parts: water and dirt. God’s essence is like absolutely pure water: it is composed of only one substance. 
But why is this important? Why does Christianity emphasize that God is simple and not composed of different substances? To answer this question, let’s look once more at the doctrine of the Trinity. The doctrine of the Trinity states that: God has three persons, but only one essence.

Central to the Doctrine of the Trinity is the distinction between person and essence. God is one with respect to essence and three with respect to person. In fact, we might say that with God, there is one “what” and three “whos.” 

—	Dr. Keith Johnson

As strongly as the Bible insists that God has three persons — the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit — it also insists that there is only one God. And very early in the life of the church, theologians determined that a useful way to talk about there being only one God was to speak in terms of his essence or substance. So, when they said that God has a simple, unified essence, they were denying that the Father, Son and Holy Spirit were three separate Gods that somehow joined together in the Trinity. And instead, they were affirming that these three persons had always existed together as only one God. 
In this way, the church made it absolutely clear that Christians do not believe in three Gods, as we are often accused by other religions. Instead, we believe in only one God — one divine being — who exists in three persons. 

Often, in speaking with Muslims, they say the Christian view of the Trinity is an affirmation of three Gods or tri-theism. Nobody in the history of the church has ever affirmed this because alongside the affirmation that the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Spirit is God, is from Genesis to Revelation, the affirmation that God is one. There is one living and true God. So that the only way that we can make sense of the full revelation of God is to say, there is one God, there is no other; the Father, Son and Spirit share in that one Godhead. The language of the church has been they subsist in that one Godhead as three persons and that is why we do not affirm that there are three gods. One God, yet in three persons. That which is taught in Scripture, affirmed by the Church and distinguishes us really from all of our religious competitors in that fashion.

—	 Dr. Stephen J. Wellum


This idea is stated explicitly in another ancient creed — the Nicene Creed — which says:

Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son of God ... [is] of one substance with the Father.

Because the Apostles’ Creed is more basic than the Nicene Creed, it does not mention this detail explicitly. Nevertheless, it implies this idea by insisting that we believe in only one God who exists in three persons.
The fact that Christians believe in one God in three persons has countless implications for the Christian life. For example, traditional Christian worship has always been fully Trinitarian: we worship all three persons of the Trinity, and we offer songs of praise and prayers of petition to each one of them. To neglect any person of the Trinity in favor of another is to neglect God himself. We owe honor, service and love to the Father, to the Son and to the Holy Spirit because they are all one God. 
Having addressed the basic Christian conception of God and the nature of his existence, we are ready to focus on the phrase Father Almighty, looking at the distinct things the Bible teaches us about God the Father, the first person of the Trinity.



FATHER ALMIGHTY
	
Our discussion of the Father Almighty will divide into four parts. First, we will look at the way the name “Father” is used of God in Scripture. Second, we will consider the person of God the Father in terms of the Trinity. Third, we will explore the nature of his fatherhood, the things he does in his role as father. And fourth, we will discuss his power. Consider first the name “Father” as it is used of God in Scripture.


NAME

The Bible uses the term “Father” in at least three distinct senses. First, it’s used of God as the creator of all things. An example of New Testament use of this sense would be 1 Corinthians 8:6 where Paul identifies the Father as the one from whom all things exist. Now, it’s important to recognize that not every Biblical reference to God as Father in this first sense is a reference to the first person of the Trinity. A second use of the term “Father” denotes the relationship that believers have with God as a result of their adoption as sons and daughters. When Paul says in Romans 8:15 that we have received the spirit of adoption by which we call God Abba, Father, he’s using “Father” in this second sense. Finally, the term ‘father’ is used to denote the unique relationship that exists between Jesus Christ and His Father. We might summarize these three uses by saying that the first speaks of God as creator, the second speaks of God as redeemer and the third speaks specifically of the person of the Father in relation to the Son.

— Dr. Keith Johnson

Unfortunately, some Christians mistakenly think that every time the Bible uses the term “Father,” it is talking about the first person of the Trinity. But the doctrine of the Trinity is not clearly revealed until the New Testament. There are hints of it here and there in the Old Testament that may indicate some awareness of plurality in the Godhead. But the Old Testament overwhelmingly stresses the oneness of God. 
So, when God is called “Father” in the Old Testament, the reference is to the entire Trinity, not just to one person. Now, in some sense, the use of the word “Father” does emphasize the person of the Father. But it’s important to remember that before the clear New Testament revelation of the three persons of God, all the terms used for God, including the name “Father,” applied in some measure to the entire Trinity. The term “Father” refers to the entire Godhead in passages like Deuteronomy 32:6, and Isaiah 63:16 and 64:8. For the sake of illustration, let’s look at just one example of this use of “Father” in the Old Testament. In Malachi 2:10, the prophet asked these questions:

Have we not all one Father? Did not one God create us? (Malachi 2:10).

Here, the entire Godhead — including the Father, Son and Holy Spirit — is spoken of as “Father” because the entire Godhead participated in the creation of humanity. The New Testament makes it clear that the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit each played a somewhat different role. But this Old Testament passage does not make such distinctions between God’s persons. Instead, it ascribes the name “Father” to all three persons collectively because of their role in creation.
To complicate matters further, as New Testament writers drew from the Old Testament, there were times when they also referred to the entire Trinity as Father in a general sense. For example, it is likely that the entire Trinity is described as “Father” in Matthew 5:45 and 6:6-18, and in Acts 17:24-29. In these passages, the entire Trinity is called “Father” for a variety of reasons. Sometimes it is because the whole Godhead participated in creating the world. At other times it is because all three persons of God are the ethical standard to which we must conform. Again, let’s consider just one verse for the sake of illustration. In James 1:17, we read these words:

Every good and perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of the heavenly lights (James 1:17).

Prior to this verse, James argued that God’s character is ethically pure. So, his point here was that everything that comes from God is good, and everything that is good comes from God. Since good things come from all the persons of our Triune God, Christian interpreters often see this as a reference to the whole Trinity. Again, as in the Old Testament, it is reasonable to see an emphasis on the person of the Father here. But it’s important to affirm that the Son and the Holy Spirit also provide good gifts for us.
Nevertheless, it is also clear that Scripture uses the word “Father” in another sense to refer to a person of the Trinity that is distinct from the Son and the Holy Spirit. We see this in John 1:14, 18; John 5:17-26; Galatians 4:6; 2 Peter 1:17. Once more, let’s look at just two examples to illustrate this point. In 2 John 9, the apostle distinguished between the Father and the Son when he wrote these words:

Anyone who ... does not continue in the teaching of Christ does not have God; whoever continues in the teaching has both the Father and the Son (2 John 9).

And in John 14:16-17, Jesus distinguished the Father from the Spirit when he gave this assurance to the apostles:

I will ask the Father, and he will give you another Counselor to be with you forever — the Spirit of truth (John 14:16-17).

Now that we have seen how the name “Father” is used in Scripture to indicate the entire Godhead as well as the first person of the Trinity, we are ready to look at the person of God the Father in distinction from the other persons of the Trinity.


PERSON
	
The Father’s association with the Son and the Holy Spirit may be described in a number of ways. But in the history of theology, two particular perspectives on the Trinity have come to the foreground. Specifically, it has been common to speak in terms of the ontological Trinity and the economic Trinity. Both these approaches speak of the same Trinity — the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit — but they emphasize different aspects of the relationship between the three persons of the Godhead. 
On the one hand, it has been common to speak of the ontological Trinity when we are focusing on God’s being. The word ontological means relating to being. So, when we speak of the ontological Trinity, we are looking at the Trinity in terms of being or essence. We are considering how the three persons of the Trinity are integrated with one another, and how they share a single essence. 
From the perspective of ontology, all three of God’s persons are infinite, eternal and unchangeable. And each has the same essential divine attributes, such as wisdom, power, holiness, justice, goodness and truth.
On the other hand, we normally say that we are speaking of the economic Trinity when we consider how God’s persons interact with each other, how they relate to one another as individual persons. The word “economic” means “relating to household management.” So, when we speak of the economic aspects of the Trinity, we are describing how the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit relate to one another as distinct individual personalities. 
When we view the Trinity from an economic point of view, each person has different responsibilities, a different level of authority, and a different assigned role with different tasks to perform. The Father, Son and Holy Spirit engage in conversations with each other. They make agreements with each other. They act upon each other. And they interact in many other ways.
From both the ontological and the economic perspectives, the Father is said to be the first person. The Father is called the first person of the ontological Trinity because the Son is said to be generated by the Father, and the Holy Spirit is said to proceed from the Father. 
Listen to the words of 1 John 4:9 regarding the generation of the Son:

This is how God showed his love among us: He sent his one and only Son into the world that we might live through him (1 John 4:9).

The phrase “one and only” comes from the Greek word monogenes, and is often translated “only begotten.” Unfortunately, some people in the early church thought that this meant that the Son was created and not fully divine. Even today some cults deny the divinity of the Son because he is called “begotten.”
To counter this false teaching, Christians have traditionally said that the Son is eternally generated or eternally begotten by the Father. These terms emphasize that there was no time when the Son did not exist. Listen to the way Jesus spoke of the Holy Spirit’s procession in John 15:26:

When the Counselor comes, whom I will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth who goes out from the Father, he will testify about me (John 15:26).

The phrase “goes out” translates the Greek word ekporeuomai, and is often rendered “proceeds.” Traditionally, this verse has been understood as referring to the source of the Holy Spirit’s existence.
Unfortunately, passages like this have led some people to conclude wrongly that the Holy Spirit is not eternal or fully divine. So, traditional Christian theology has been careful to insist that the Holy Spirit is a full member of the Trinity, and that he is fully divine, even though his personhood eternally proceeds from the Father.
Besides being the first person of the ontological Trinity, the Father is also called the first person of the economic Trinity. From the economic perspective, the Father is said to be the “first person” because he has authority over the other two persons, much like a human father has authority over his household. 
We see the Father’s authority over the Son in many ways. For instance, the Son does the Father’s will, as we learn in John 6:40. And the Son gets his authority and kingdom from the Father, according to passages like Ephesians 1:20-22. In fact, Scripture repeatedly tells us that the Son’s kingship is subordinate to the Father’s kingship. We see this in the frequent idea that Jesus sits at God’s right hand, that is, on the right side of God’s throne, as in Psalm 110:1 and Hebrews 1:3. God’s right hand is a place of honor and power, to be sure, but it is not the throne itself. And ultimately, the Son will hand over his kingdom to the Father, as Paul teaches in 1 Corinthians 15:24. In short, in the economic Trinity, the Father has authority over the Son.

The question of the relationship between the Father and the Son and the exercise of all authority is a complex one, but it really has to do with the distinction between the roles that the Father and the Son play within the Trinity, and the fact that, in his role, the Son voluntarily has a subservience to the Father. He came to earth to submit himself to the Father’s will and the Father exercises all authority. But at the same time these are relationships of love in which the Father loves the Son, and the Son loves the Father, and they seek to please and honor one another within the Trinity. So, we need to sort of unpick a little bit, the difference between the roles in which they play and the relationships of love in which they enjoy.

—	Dr. Simon Vibert

Similarly, the Father has authority over the Spirit. For instance, we are often told that it is the Father that sends the Spirit, as in Luke 11:13 and Ephesians 1:17. We also learn that it was the Father that empowered the Son with the Spirit in Acts 10:38. Throughout Scripture, the Holy Spirit is the Father’s agent in the world, being instructed by the Father to carry out his will. In the economic Trinity, the Father has authority over the Holy Spirit, just as he has authority over the Son.

The Father’s authority is always an authority of love. The Father’s authority is an authority that loves the Son, desires the Son to be glorified, just as the Son then desires the Father to be glorified. And finally, if they share a heart of love, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, then the idea that there would be a disagreement of wills between the Father, Son and Spirit becomes kind of comical in one sense because if the Son eternally and the Spirit eternally long to do the will of the Father, and the Father eternally longs to glorify and honor the Son and the Spirit, then essentially in the life of God there is unanimity of will, a unanimity of love; because a unanimity of being in this fellowship of the Trinity. 

—	Dr. Steve Blakemore

With this understanding of how the name “Father” is used in Scripture, and of the person of God the Father, we are ready to look at the nature of his fatherhood over creation and humanity.
