### THREEFOLD VICTORY

The fact that the victory of God’s kingdom comes in the inauguration, continuation, and consummation of Jesus’ messianic work raised all kinds of questions in the early church. What had Jesus already accomplished? What would he accomplish in church history? What would he do at his return? These kinds of questions were so important in the first century that they deeply shaped the theology of the New Testament. New Testament authors drew upon the fact that the defeat of God’s enemies and the deliverance of God’s people had begun in Christ’s first advent. These events would continue throughout church history, and would finally reach completion in Christ’s second victorious coming.
Time will only allow us to point to some of the ways this threefold victory shaped New Testament theology, but it will help to look in two directions. First, we’ll note how the New Testament explains the defeat of God’s enemies in the three stages of the kingdom. Then, we’ll examine New Testament teachings on the deliverance of God’s people in all three stages as well. Let’s look first at the defeat of God’s enemies. 

#### Defeat

Unbelieving Jews held that the Messiah would defeat both human and spiritual enemies of God. New Testament authors believed this as well. But they also understood that Jesus would do this in ways that were appropriate for each stage of his kingdom. 
New Testament theology emphasizes that Jesus’ strategy was twofold in the inauguration of the kingdom. On one side, he inflicted the judgment of God on God’s spiritual enemies. Throughout his ministry, Jesus disempowered evil spirits by casting them out of their positions of power. But on the other side, he extended the mercy of God to God’s human enemies. To be sure, Christ’s mercy toward people led to many blessings for them, but it also furthered the defeat of evil spirits by robbing them of their human servants. 
In Matthew 12:28-29, Jesus himself explained this strategy when he said:

> If I drive out demons by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God has come upon you… how can anyone enter a strong man’s house and carry off his possessions unless he first ties up the strong man? Then he can rob his house (Matthew 12:28-29).

Jesus came and bound up demons, or “tie[d] up the strong man,” in order to “rob his house.” In other words, Jesus drove demons out and freed those who were under the demons’ control. 
We can also see this twofold strategy in places like John 12:31-32 where Jesus said:

> Now is the time for judgment on this world; now the prince of this world will be driven out. And I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all people to myself (John 12:31-32).

Once again, in the inauguration of the kingdom, Jesus directly attacked evil spirits, or “the prince of this world,” Satan. He drove him out and disempowered him. But along with this aggression against Satan, Jesus offered salvation to humanity. 

> Sometimes people wonder, how can this view of Christus Victor, the victorious Christ, be consistent or related to the idea of Christ as the one who died for our sins, a substitutionary atonement? … In John’s gospel, the third time Jesus speaks of the Son of Man being lifted up as the serpent was lifted in the wilderness — it’s in John 12 — he connects that lifting up specifically with the statement, “now will the ruler of this world be cast down.” So, Jesus takes the place of the cursed serpent, he goes to death to destroy death from within. So, his first act as Christus Victor is to destroy death from within by being lifted up on the cross.
— Rev. Michael J. Glodo

The defeat of God’s spiritual enemies was so important to Christ’s inaugural work that in passages like Hebrews 2:14-15, New Testament authors wrote about Christ’s atoning death on the cross in terms of this same twofold strategy. They made it clear that, through his death, Jesus broke the power Satan had over human beings. And by making atonement for the sins of humanity, Jesus set people free who had been slaves to sin and death. 
These ideas appear clearly in Colossians 2:15 where the apostle Paul wrote:

> Having disarmed the powers and authorities, [Christ] made a public spectacle of them, triumphing over them by the cross (Colossians 2:15).

Demonic powers and authorities lost their positions of prominence when Jesus set his people free from the dominion of sin by dying on the cross. 
In this light, it should be no surprise that in Ephesians 4:8, the resurrection and ascension of Christ is described as a plundering of Satan’s human servants: 

> When he ascended on high, he took many captives and gave gifts to his people (Ephesians 4:8).

As this passage indicates, when men and women come to faith in Christ, it’s as if Christ takes them as plunder from the kingdom of Satan. 
This strategy for the defeat of God’s spiritual opponents also appears in the inaugural work of Christ’s apostles in the book of Acts. Following Jesus’ example, the apostles repeatedly cast out demons as they preached the gospel in Gentile nations and dispossessed Satan of many human servants. 
Not surprisingly, when we consider the continuation of Christ’s kingdom throughout church history, we find that followers of Christ are to pursue the strategy that Jesus used in the inauguration. Rather than gaining victory over God’s human enemies, we should focus our attention on the evil spirits who oppose the ways of God. 
Although many modern Christians fail to realize it, New Testament kingdom theology frequently reminds us that the church of Jesus is not at war with people, but with Satan and other evil spirits. And it’s our responsibility to contend with these spiritual enemies of God. 
This is why, in passages like Ephesians 6:11-12, the New Testament interprets our difficulties and struggles as conflicts with evil spirits. Here we read:

> Put on the full armor of God so that you can take your stand against the devil’s schemes. For our struggle is not against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the powers of this dark world and against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly realms (Ephesians 6:11-12).

Much of the time modern Christians think of the struggles of their lives as conflict with mere human beings. But here we see that the conflict facing the church is actually with “the devil,” “rulers,” “authorities,” “the powers of this dark world” and “the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly realms.” And by putting on the full armor of God we are able to disempower these spiritual beings that oppose the kingdom of God.
This passage is not unusual in its emphasis on spiritual warfare as a dimension of Christ’s kingdom throughout Christian history. The constant conflict we experience with Satan and other evil spirits can also be found in a number of other passages like Ephesians 4:27; 1 Timothy 3:7; 2 Timothy 2:26; James 4:7; 1 Peter 5:8; 1 John 3:8; and Jude 9. But at the same time, as we read in 2 Corinthians 5:20, we must also extend the mercy of God to his human enemies.

> We are therefore Christ’s ambassadors, as though God were making his appeal through us. We implore you on Christ’s behalf: Be reconciled to God (2 Corinthians 5:20).

Following Paul’s example, as “Christ’s ambassadors,” representatives of God’s kingdom, we continue to defeat God’s spiritual enemies by seeking reconciliation between God and his human enemies. 
New Testament theology also associates the defeat of God’s enemies with the consummation of Christ’s kingdom. It’s important to note, however, that a dramatic change occurs in Jesus’ strategy at the consummation. When Christ returns, he will no longer extend mercy to God’s human enemies. Instead, Christ will lead in battle against God’s spiritual and human enemies to bring about their utter defeat, their elimination from the earth, and their eternal judgment. 
Listen to the way Revelation 19:13-15 describes the defeat of God’s human enemies at the consummation:

> His name is the Word of God. The armies of heaven were following him … Out of his mouth comes a sharp sword with which to strike down the nations (Revelation 19:13-15). 

In a similar way, Revelation 20:10 depicts Christ’s glorious return as the time of final judgment against evil spirits and Satan:

> And the devil, who deceived them, was thrown into the lake of burning sulfur, where the beast and the false prophet had been thrown. They will be tormented day and night for ever and ever (Revelation 20:10). 

Of course, we’ve only briefly summarized these matters. But we can see from these examples that New Testament authors felt it was necessary to clarify this facet of the kingdom’s victory time and again. They stressed the priority of aggression against evil spirits and emphasized kindness toward God’s human enemies during both the inauguration and continuation of the kingdom. But they also pointed out that, in the end, when Christ returns, both human and spiritual enemies will come under the eternal judgment of God. These emphases confirm that the defeat of God’s enemies is a crucial feature of New Testament kingdom theology. 

> The kingdom has started, it is here, but it is still wending its way, forging its way until the consummation. So, in what ways, then, the question asks, is Jesus already victorious over his enemies? Well, first of all, the most crucial victory is in the cross itself so that he defeats Satan… In that sense, the crucial battle has been fought and won. And that’s why, for example, in Revelation 12, the saints respond to the accuser of the brethren, they overcome him by the blood of the Lamb. They overcome Satan — described metaphorically in Revelation 12 — they overcome him by the blood of the Lamb. And, so, that battle has already been won. But, like Hitler toward the end of World War II, when he could see that the war was over, he didn’t quit. He was filled with fury because he knew his time was short. That’s what is said of Satan. So, Satan is more virulent now, and every time the gospel advances, more people are converted, righteousness is established in individual lives, in the local church, in any sort of subculture, that is already an ongoing defeat of Satan and of all those who love darkness. And the ultimate trajectory toward the ultimate victory is when the kingdoms of this world become the kingdoms of our God and of his Christ, and he will reign forever… The point is that the trajectory has been set in place so that, as Philippians 2 puts it, every knee will bow, every tongue will confess that Jesus is Lord, and the fundamental victory has been won. That’s still got to be worked out in some respects. It’s being worked out in the lives of many who do joyfully, by the power of the Spirit, bend the knee. But everyone will bend the knee on the last day.
— Dr. D. A. Carson 

Now that we’ve seen how the threefold victory of God’s kingdom includes the defeat of God’s enemies, we should point out how the deliverance of God’s people also plays a major role in New Testament theology. 

#### Deliverance

If there’s one facet of the inauguration of the kingdom that stands out to most readers, it’s the deliverance of God’s people into the blessings of the kingdom. For instance, one of the main reasons the Gospels focus so much attention on Jesus’ miracles is because these miracles represented the blessings of the kingdom that Jesus brought to earth. Jesus’ miracles were temporary foretastes of kingdom blessings that God’s people would enjoy forever in the age to come. Beyond this, Jesus’ attention to social justice for the poor, the needy, and those who suffered at the hands of others also represented important blessings of the kingdom.
The miracles and social justice of Jesus and his apostles and prophets were extraordinary blessings. But the greatest blessing in the inauguration of God’s kingdom was the gift of eternal salvation that Christ gave to all who believed in him. 
This is why in Colossians 1:13-14 Paul described receiving salvation in Christ as deliverance from one kingdom to another.

> For he has rescued us from the dominion of darkness and brought us into the kingdom of the Son he loves, in whom we have redemption, the forgiveness of sins (Colossians 1:13-14).

The theme of deliverance into kingdom blessings also helps us understand why the New Testament emphasizes the Holy Spirit’s work so much. By the end of the apostolic ministry, the outpouring of the Holy Spirit on Christ’s followers was the one blessing of the world to come that was granted to every believer. As we read in 2 Corinthians 1:21-22:

> He anointed us, set his seal of ownership on us, and put his Spirit in our hearts as a deposit, guaranteeing what is to come (2 Corinthians 1:21-22).

This passage closely parallels Ephesians 1:14. Both passages indicate that the Holy Spirit is Christ’s “seal of ownership on us.” He is “a deposit, guaranteeing what is to come.” In other words, the Holy Spirit, the power of God in our lives today, is the first installment of the grand inheritance that followers of Christ will receive when Christ returns in glory. 
The New Testament also addresses the deliverance of God’s people during the continuation of Christ’s kingdom. In the ongoing life of the church, New Testament authors encouraged Christ’s followers to remember how God had delivered them already into the blessings of his kingdom. New Testament theology emphasizes that, not only has God saved us from judgment for our sins, but God also continues to grant the gift of the Holy Spirit to his church. For example, listen to 1 Corinthians 4:20:

> For the kingdom of God is not a matter of talk but of power (1 Corinthians 4:20).

Here, as in many other places, the “power” Paul had in mind was the power of the Holy Spirit. 
The Spirit of God is the wondrous reality of God’s blessings for his people that we experience day after day. He sanctifies us, produces his fruit in our lives, fills us with joy, and strengthens us with his power against our enemies. Despite the fact that many branches of Christ’s church today de-emphasize the Holy Spirit’s role in believers’ lives, he is our greatest blessing during the continuation of Christ’s kingdom.
New Testament theology also encourages followers of Christ who live during the continuation of his kingdom, to keep their hopes fixed on even greater blessings in the kingdom to come. 
Hebrews 12:28 calls for followers of Christ to remain faithful in light of the blessings of the kingdom still ahead:

> Since we are receiving a kingdom that cannot be shaken, let us be thankful, and so worship God acceptably with reverence and awe (Hebrews 12:28).

And in James 2:5 we read:

> Has not God chosen those who are poor in the eyes of the world to be rich in faith and to inherit the kingdom he promised those who love him? (James 2:5).

James called on the church to stop showing favoritism to the rich because it is not the wealthy who receive the kingdom. Rather, those who are “rich in faith” and “those who love him” will “inherit the kingdom he promised.” 
Jesus delivered his people into kingdom blessings when he inaugurated the kingdom. And his kingdom blessings have continued in the life of the church throughout history. But Scripture teaches that the complete deliverance of God’s people into the blessings of God’s kingdom won’t be accomplished until the final consummation of the kingdom. In the consummation, God’s people will fully experience all the promised blessings of the kingdom. As we read in Revelation 11:15:

> The kingdom of the world has become the kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ, and he will reign for ever and ever (Revelation 11:15).

When Christ returns, the kingdom of the world will be completely replaced with the victorious kingdom of God. And listen to Revelation 5:9-10 where the heavenly creatures sing in praise of Christ:

> You are worthy to take the scroll and to open its seals, because you were slain, and with your blood you purchased for God persons from every tribe and language and people and nation. You have made them to be a kingdom and priests to serve our God, and they will reign on the earth (Revelation 5:9-10).

In the consummation, God’s people will be delivered to become “a kingdom [of] priests,” and “they will reign on the earth.”

> When we think about Jesus coming again and winning his final victory, we don’t want to think simply in terms of Jesus overwhelming his enemies by what the French would call force majeure, just raw exercise of power. In Revelation it talks about the sword coming out of Jesus’ mouth, and that is surely the sword of the Word, the sword of justice, that final judgment is as much about exposure as anything else. And likewise for the saints, particularly in the New Testament context, vindication is one of the chief themes. They’ve gone on believing in Jesus and gone on turning the other cheek and loving your enemies and doing all these other things while the world says this is complete foolishness. So, at the judgment, all things are made clear, all things become transparent; the truth will out, and that will be good news for the saints and bad news for the wicked whose wickedness consists precisely in resisting Jesus and his message.
— Dr. Sean McDonough 

As we can see, New Testament authors drew attention to the defeat of God’s enemies and the deliverance of his people into kingdom blessings at every stage of Jesus’ messianic work. While these elements may seem disconnected at first, they are joined together and emphasized in New Testament theology because they represent a crucial theme: the arrival of victory for the kingdom of God in Christ. 

## CONCLUSION

In this lesson, we’ve looked at the importance of the kingdom of God in New Testament theology. Rather than being a minor or marginal teaching of the New Testament, God’s kingdom shapes the very heart of what New Testament authors taught. We’ve explored how this was true with the good news of the kingdom. And we’ve also seen how New Testament theology focused on the coming of the kingdom in the inauguration, continuation and consummation of Christ’s kingdom. 
As we’ve seen, it’s no exaggeration to say that New Testament faith is all about the kingdom of God. New Testament theology stresses the good news of victory for the kingdom of God and how this victory has come, is coming, and will come in the three stages of Christ’s kingdom. These basic kingdom concepts represent some of the most important themes of the New Testament. Keeping them in mind will greatly enhance our understanding of New Testament theology. And we’ll find new significance in the teachings of the New Testament. Without question, the theme of the kingdom of God in Christ undergirds every facet of New Testament theology.

 

CONTRIBUTORS

Dr. Simon Vibert (Host) is Vice Principal of Wycliffe Hall of the University of Oxford where he also serves as Director of the School of Preaching. Dr. Vibert received his Th.M. from Glasgow University, his D.Min. from Reformed Theological Seminary, and his Postgraduate Diploma in Learning and Teaching in Higher Education from the University of Oxford. He is a Trustee of Latimer Trust, a member of the Church of England Evangelical Council, and served as Chairman of the Fellowship of Word and Spirit. Dr. Vibert also served for 8 years as Vicar of St. Luke's Church Wimbledon Park. He has produced numerous books and theological articles, including Excellence in Preaching: Learning from the Best (IVP, 2011); Stress: The Path to Peace (Inter-Varsity Press, 2014); and Lives Jesus Changed (Christian Focus Publications, 2010).


Dr. Constantine R. Campbell is Associate Professor of New Testament at Trinity Evangelical Divinity School.

Dr. D.A. Carson is Research Professor of New Testament at Trinity Evangelical Divinity School and Co-founder of The Gospel Coalition.

Rev. Michael J. Glodo is Associate Professor of Biblical Studies at Reformed Theological Seminary in Orlando, Florida.

Dr. Richard Lints is Professor of Theology and Vice President for Academic Affairs at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary. 

Dr. Sean McDonough is Professor of New Testament at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary. 

Dr. Eckhard J. Schnabel is the Mary F. Rockefeller Distinguished Professor of New Testament Studies at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary.

Dr. Mark L. Strauss is Professor of New Testament at Bethel Seminary, San Diego.
 
