POWER
	
Look once again at the first article of faith in the Apostles’ Creed. It says:

I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth. 
When the Apostles’ Creed says that God the Father is almighty, it means that he has unlimited, matchless power. In traditional theological terms, God’s almighty power is referred to as his omnipotence, from the root omni, meaning all, and the word potency, meaning power.
The Father’s power is unlimited because he has the strength and ability to accomplish whatever he chooses. And it is matchless because he is the only one that possesses this type of power. 
We’ll consider both aspects of the Father’s power that we have just mentioned: the fact that it is unlimited, and the fact that it is matchless. Let’s begin with the unlimited nature of his power.


Unlimited

Scripture describes the Father as having power to do anything he wills to do. And it demonstrates this unlimited power in many different ways. It speaks of him as having the power to create the universe and to destroy it. It says that he has power to control the weather, to defeat his enemies in battle, to rule and to control human governments, to perform mighty miracles, and to save his people. Listen to how the prophet Jeremiah described the Lord in Jeremiah 10:10-16:

The Lord is the true God; he is the living God, the eternal King. When he is angry, the earth trembles; the nations cannot endure his wrath... God made the earth by his power; he founded the world by his wisdom and stretched out the heavens by his understanding. When he thunders, the waters in the heavens roar; he makes clouds rise from the ends of the earth. He sends lightning with the rain and brings out the wind from his storehouses... He is the Maker of all things, including Israel, the tribe of his inheritance — the Lord Almighty is his name (Jeremiah 10:10-16).

God ultimately controls every aspect of the created world. He has the power to do whatever he pleases. In Isaiah 46:10-11, the Lord himself summarized his power this way:

My purpose will stand, and I will do all that I please … What I have said, that will I bring about; what I have planned, that will I do (Isaiah 46:10-11).


God’s omnipotence is a good reminder to us as believers that when the world seems like it’s spinning out of control, feels like it’s descending into chaos, it’s not. God cannot be bound by another source or power superior to his. The world, whatever else it may seem like, the world is not spinning out of control, God is sovereign, we may have confidence that he has not been overpowered, and it gives us strength to walk with faith in those times that appear mysterious to our limited perspective. When we don’t see all that God sees, it is good to know that God has not had his control or his power wrested from him against his will. Whatever is coming to me, whatever is taking place in my life, is taking place under the authority of God’s loving hand. And I can take confidence, even when I can’t explain my circumstances that I know the God who sustains me and walks through this with me. 

—	Dr. Robert G. Lister


Throughout the Bible, Scripture commonly points to God’s redemption of his people as an ideal demonstration of his power. In the Old Testament, we frequently read that he proved his power in the Exodus when he smote the Egyptians with plagues, freed the Israelites from slavery, sustained them with food from heaven for forty years in the desert, and gave them conquest over the Promised Land. In the minds of ancient Israel, the Exodus was the greatest example of God’s redemptive power they knew.
We find references to God’s power in the Exodus throughout the books of the Law, in passages like Exodus 14:31; Numbers 14:13; and Deuteronomy 9:26-29. We also see this theme in every other part of the Old Testament. We find it in the historical books in 2 Kings 17:36; in the poetic books in places like Psalm 66:3-6; and in the prophetic books in places like Isaiah 63:12.
Now, this is not to say that the ancient Israelites ignored the surpassing greatness of the spiritual redemption they received by grace through faith in the Lord. It was perfectly valid for them to say things like, “I believe in God’s power by faith.” But many Old Testament authors found it more compelling to say things like, “God proved his power by single-handedly freeing our entire nation from slavery.” And this should not be surprising. After all, the external demonstrations of God’s might in the Exodus were so irrefutable that even the unbelieving Egyptians were convinced. 
With this understanding of God’s unlimited power in mind, we should pause to mention that there are certain things that God cannot or will not do, despite his unlimited power. Specifically, the Father’s nature governs everything he does. As a result, he never does anything that is contrary to his nature.
Nature is a broad term that includes both essential and personal attributes. We might define it as one’s fundamental character; or the central aspects of one’s being. In the case of the Father, his nature includes not only his being and his character, but also his relationships with the other members of the Trinity. And the Father’s nature is absolutely immutable and unchangeable, so that it will always lead him to exercise his power in similar ways. James 1:17 speaks of the unchangeable quality of God’s nature in this way:

The Father of the heavenly lights ... does not change like shifting shadows (James 1:17).

The Father’s nature does not limit his ability to do things that are compatible with his nature. But it does guarantee that he will only exercise his almighty power in ways that are consistent with his attributes. For example, he will never cease to be eternal. He will never revoke his authority over the Son and the Holy Spirit. He will never do anything sinful. And he will always keep his promises.

It’s very interesting to me that one of the factors in the rise of modern science was the recognition that God operates the same way today as he did yesterday. Whereas wherever animism obtains in this world — the belief that there are many gods and that gods reside in the elements of this world, beliefs that God is utterly unpredictable — and if God is utterly unpredictable, you’re not able to study this world because you don’t know if it’ll act this way today and a different way tomorrow. But if God is unchangeable then you can actually go out and study the world and understand how God made it and how it works. And so that very belief in the unchangeability of God enabled the rise of modern science. Well, in the same way that it enabled the rise of modern science, it enables the assurance and the comfort and the peace of a Christian in uncertain circumstances, because we don’t have to figure it all out. We don’t have to know what’s coming around the corner. All we have to know is that our God is completely sufficient to meet any and every challenge that we encounter, and that he will predictably address that situation in the same way he promised to David, to Abraham and to Adam and to Jesus and to Paul — that he’s dependable, that he’s faithful, that he’s not fickle, that he doesn’t change from day to day, and he has every power within himself to address our every circumstance. 

—	Dr. J. Ligon Duncan III

Now that we have discussed the unlimited nature of the Father’s might, we should turn to its matchless qualities, noting that God alone is omnipotent.


Matchless
	
Listen to the way God’s matchless power is described in Isaiah 14:24-27:

The Lord Almighty has sworn, “Surely, as I have planned, so it will be, and as I have purposed, so it will stand. I will crush the Assyrian in my land; on my mountains I will trample him down. His yoke will be taken from my people, and his burden removed from their shoulders.” This is the plan determined for the whole world; this is the hand stretched out over all nations. For the Lord Almighty has purposed, and who can thwart him? His hand is stretched out, and who can turn it back? (Isaiah 14:24-27).

Notice that in this passage, the description of the Lord’s unlimited power is followed by an assertion that he alone possesses omnipotence. There is no one who can thwart him, no one who can turn back his hand. 
The fact that the Father’s power is matchless flows naturally from the fact that there is only one true God. Certainly, if there were another being of infinite power, God’s status as the only God could be challenged. After all, a being of infinite power would either be divine, or could make himself divine by virtue of his own power.
This is essentially what God told Job in Job 38, when he said that Job would be able to justify himself if he could first do the same powerful acts that God had already done, such as creating, ordering and providentially controlling the universe.
But the reality is that only God is truly divine. And therefore, only God has unlimited power.
Sadly, in our day many well-meaning Christians deny that God is all-powerful. They misunderstand the Scriptures to teach that God himself is doing all he can with his creation. But the omnipotence of God is a wonderfully practical teaching of Scripture. When the people of God are in trouble, they cry out for God’s help because they know that he is able to save. When evil seems to be in control of the world, we can rest assured that God has total power over evil. Without faith in God’s omnipotence, we have no basis for our confidence that God will defeat his enemies, and that his children will receive the eternal blessings he has promised.
It’s amazing to think about all the rich theology that is rolled into the phrase Father Almighty. We serve a powerful, personal, fatherly God that loves us and cares for us in astounding ways. And we can be completely assured that his protection will never fail because we know that he himself will never fail. He will always be our creator, king and family head. He will always have unlimited, matchless power. And he will never change. He will always be there to save us, and the salvation he offers is just as everlasting as he is.
So far in this lesson we have explored the nature of our Trinitarian God, and the characteristics of the divine person known as the Father Almighty. At this point, we are ready to turn to our third topic: the role of the Father as the Maker of heaven and earth
