MAKER

Our discussion of the Father as the Maker of heaven and earth will focus on three facets of his creative work. First, we will consider the Father’s work of creation. Second, we will focus on the goodness of creation. And third, we will mention the Father’s authority over creation. Let’s begin by thinking about the work of creation that the Father performed.


WORK OF CREATION
	
Creation is the one work that the Apostles’ Creed specifically attributes to the Father. You will recall that its first article of faith states:

I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth. 
Of all the things that the Father is said to do in Scripture, this is the one work that historic Christianity has insisted that all Christians affirm.
Most Christians are familiar with the idea that God created and sustains the universe, largely because Scripture refers to it so often. In fact, if we open our Bibles to the first page and begin reading, the first thing we are told is that God is the maker of heaven and earth. As we learn in Genesis 1:1:

In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth (Genesis 1:1). 

After this introductory verse, the rest of Genesis 1 explains that God created and ordered the universe within the span of six days.
Now, throughout the history of the church, there have been many different theories about the interpretation of the creation account in Genesis 1. Nearly all theologians have agreed that God created the universe ex nihilo or out of nothing. That is to say, before God created the heavens and the earth, nothing existed except God himself. There was no preexistent matter from which God made the universe. And many have suggested that God created even time and space itself.
But theologians have often disagreed about the precise manner in which the Father created the universe, especially over the nature of the six days of creation. Several Church Fathers, such as Clement, Origen and Augustine, believed that the days were figurative representations of a creation that probably took place in a single moment. Others, such as Irenaeus and Tertullian, saw them as normal 24-hour days. Later, when science began to suggest that the universe was very old, many theologians began to read the creation account in new ways. Some suggested that the days were normal 24-hour periods, but that large stretches of time intervened between the days on which God created. Others interpreted the days as figures of speech that represented eras or epochs. 

Certainly, the issue of the days of creation in Genesis 1 is a hot one that has been the source of a lot of arguments. I think one of the issues is: what kind of literature is this? Is this literature which is designed to give a sensuous fact, facts relating to the senses, or is it literature designed to teach spiritual fact. Now, we shouldn’t drive a wedge between those two. God’s the creator of this world and they should fit together. But if we read Genesis 1 as a science text, that will lead us to a different interpretation than if we read it as a discussion of the meaning and nature of creation.

—	Dr. John Oswalt

For the early church and their use of the Apostles’ Creed, what seems to have been most important was that believers acknowledge that God and God alone, led by the person of the Father, created and sustains the entire universe, including both the spiritual and material realms, with all their substances and creatures. 
This is the same idea that the Levites emphasized in Nehemiah 9:6. Listen to their words:

You alone are the Lord. You made the heavens, even the highest heavens, and all their starry host, the earth and all that is on it, the seas and all that is in them. You give life to everything, and the multitudes of heaven worship you (Nehemiah 9:6).

As we read here, God alone made the universe. And God alone continues to give life to everything that exists, sustaining the universe he created.
Now, it’s important to point out that even though the Father took a leading role in making and sustaining heaven and earth, these acts involve the entire Trinity in various ways. For example, the Son was the means or instrument that the Father used to make the world, and that he still uses to sustain it.
Listen to the way Paul described the work of creation in 1 Corinthians 8:6:

There is but one God, the Father, from whom all things came and for whom we live; and there is but one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom all things came and through whom we live (1 Corinthians 8:6).

Here, Paul explained that the Father is the source of creation. Creation comes from him. But it comes through the Son. We continue to live because the Father sustains our lives through his Son. 
The Holy Spirit’s involvement is mentioned less explicitly in Scripture. Primarily it is implied in Old Testament passages that refer to the work of the Spirit of God. During the days of the Old Testament, the Holy Spirit had not yet been clearly revealed as a distinct person of God. Nevertheless, the New Testament teaches that he was already active in the world carrying out God’s will. We see this in passages like Mark 12:36 that speak of the Holy Spirit inspiring Old Testament authors, and Acts 2:2-17, where Peter taught that the Holy Spirit was the source of prophecy and spiritual gifting even during the Old Testament.
So, when we read Old Testament accounts of God’s Spirit, it is reasonable to infer that they foreshadow the later, clearer revelation that the Holy Spirit is a distinct divine person. For instance, in Genesis 1:2-3, we read this account:

Now the earth was formless and empty, darkness was over the surface of the deep, and the Spirit of God was hovering over the waters. And God said, “Let there be light,” and there was light (Genesis 1:2-3).

The words “Spirit of God” literally refer to God in all his persons. But from our New Testament perspective, we can see in them an emphasis on the activity of the person of the Holy Spirit.
Having looked at the Father’s role as Maker in the work of creation, we are ready to focus on the goodness of the creation the Father made.


GOODNESS OF CREATION
	
Many religions and philosophies teach that the material universe is amoral, that is, neither good nor evil. Others actually say that the world is evil. For example, many of the pagan philosophies the early church encountered taught that the material universe was corrupt, and that to be truly saved human beings had to escape the bondage of their bodies. This negative view of the world was one reason the Apostles’ Creed emphasized that God made the heavens and the earth. In the Bible, the universe is God’s good creation that reflects his good character.
In Genesis 1, we are reminded of the goodness of creation in verses 4, 10, 12, 18, 21, 25 and 31 — seven times in all. And in the last of these, Scripture records that the entire creation is not just “good” but “very good.” As Moses wrote in Genesis 1:31:

God saw all that he had made, and it was very good (Genesis 1:31).

Sadly, soon after God created the world, Adam and Eve sinned against God by eating from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. And as a result of humanity’s sin, God placed the entire creation under a curse. One text that speaks of this is Genesis 3:17-19, where God spoke this curse to Adam:

Cursed is the ground because of you; through painful toil you will eat of it all the days of your life. It will produce thorns and thistles for you, and you will eat the plants of the field. By the sweat of your brow you will eat your food (Genesis 3:17-19).

Because of Adam’s sin, God cursed the ground so that gardening became difficult, forcing Adam and the rest of humanity to work hard for their food. And this curse on the ground was not limited to farming. It affected the whole world in all of its aspects. Paul wrote about this problem in Romans 8 when he argued that the redemption of believers through Jesus Christ would eventually lead to a restoration of the creation itself. Listen to what Paul wrote in Romans 8:20-22:

For the creation was subjected to frustration ... in hope that the creation itself will be liberated from its bondage to decay ... [T]he whole creation has been groaning as in the pains of childbirth right up to the present time (Romans 8:20-22).

Paul taught that the curse on the ground affected every element of creation.
But despite God’s curse, we should not make the mistake of thinking that the creation is no longer good. Yes, humanity’s fall into sin damaged the creation. But it is still God’s world, and it is still fundamentally good. Paul made this point when he was writing about the abiding validity of marriage, and the freedom Christians have to eat all sorts of food. Listen to his words in 1 Timothy 4:4:

Everything God created is good (1 Timothy 4:4).

Notice what Paul said here. He did not say that everything created “was” good, but that everything God created “is” good. 

The fact that the physical world is good—that God declared it good—has lots of practical implications for us. For one thing, we need to protect the environment. We are stewards over this creation. For another thing, ultimately God is going to preserve this creation. He is going to recreate; there is going to be a restoration of creation, rather than destruction of creation. We are going to live forever in a new heaven and a new earth. The physical world that God created is a good thing. Our physical bodies, our physical presence, is a good thing.
—	Dr. Mark L. Strauss

So, whether we are talking about marriage or food or any other thing created by God, we can be confident that it is good because the Father that created it is good. This is why Paul could also say, in Romans 1, that the goodness of God himself is still visible to all humanity through the things he has made. It is why Psalm 19 can claim that the heavens declare the glory of God.
John Wesley described the goodness of creation in his eighteenth-century work, A Survey of the Wisdom of God in the Creation, part 3, chapter 2. Listen to what he wrote there:

The whole universe is a picture, in which are displayed the perfections of the Deity. It shows not only his existence, but his unity, his power, his wisdom, his independence, his goodness. 

The universe displays God’s goodness through its own innate goodness — a goodness that it possesses because it was created by a good God.

God’s creation reflects his goodness. It tells us first of all that creation isn’t in itself evil, that evil doesn’t exist inherently in matter. But it also tells us that when God created the world, he created it very good. That there is beauty in creation. Now that beauty is marred as a consequence of the fall. Thorns and thistles and the sweat of one’s brow, have distorted God’s creation, but as Christians, we have begun the process, or God has begun the process within us of recreating us. We are a new creation in Jesus Christ and as the hymn writer says, as Christians, we see something that Christless eyes have never seen. We begin to see creation as God’s handiwork. Therefore, as Christians, we see art, beauty, structure, coherence, integration within creation itself. And this is what we anticipate in the new heavens and new earth, when God’s creation will be made entirely new and we will be able to enjoy creation as God intended us to enjoy creation.

—	Dr. Derek Thomas

With this understanding of the work of creation and the goodness of creation in mind, we are ready to address the Father’s authority over creation, which he possesses as its maker.


AUTHORITY OVER CREATION
	
There are many things we might say about the Father’s authority as the creator. But we will focus on just three of its basic characteristics: His authority is absolute, exclusive and exhaustive. We’ll take a closer look at each of these ideas, starting with the absolute nature of the Father’s authority as creator.


Absolute

The Father’s authority is absolute in the sense that he has complete freedom to do whatever he wants with his creation. Scripture often compares his absolute authority to a potter’s authority over his clay. We find this description in places like Isaiah 29:16, Isaiah 45:9, Jeremiah 18:1-10, and Romans 9:18-24. Listen to the way Paul spoke of God’s authority in Romans 9:20-21:

Shall what is formed say to him who formed it, “Why did you make me like this?” Does not the potter have the right to make out of the same lump of clay some pottery for noble purposes and some for common use? (Romans 9:20-21).

Of course, the answers to Paul’s rhetorical questions are obvious. Because God is the creator of all, he has the freedom and right to do whatever he wants with what he creates.

I think when some people hear that the Bible teaches that God has ultimate authority over everything that happens in the world, they feel maybe threatened by that; they feel resentful. But Christians, really when we think about who God is, should feel incredibly thankful. It means that our lives are in the hands of an all wise, all mighty, all loving Father who has given His own son for us on the cross. And that is such incredible, incredible comfort in times of suffering in particular, in times when we wonder what is happening in our lives. 

—	Dr. Dennis E. Johnson


Even if we don’t understand all things that are happening, if you belong to Jesus Christ, God is your Father and he loves you. And he’s protecting you, and he’s watching over you no matter what you’re going through. And some things we go through in this life are incredibly painful. But no matter what you’re going through, he is in control. He has even — can you accept this at this point in your life? — he has even appointed this for your good, for your sanctification. God turns the enemies in our lives, he turns them into our friends so that we more than conquer through him who loved us. We don’t just conquer; it says that we more than conquer through him who loved us. So, God takes the trials and difficulties, and he uses them to sanctify us, to make us more like Jesus Christ. He brings the things he brings into our lives so that we will be like Christ. Hebrews 12: he disciplines us as a kind and wise and good father. I think the fight of faith is often fought exactly at this point. We have to say to ourselves over and over again, God, God cares for me and even if I don’t understand it. He is bringing this into my life for my good, for my holiness, for my sanctification.

—	 Dr. Thomas R. Schreiner


Exclusive

Besides having absolute authority, the Father also has exclusive authority over everything he has created. The Father’s authority as creator is exclusive in the sense that no creature possesses absolute authority. Absolute authority belongs only to the creator, and God is the only creator. And beyond this, when we view the Trinity economically, the Father also has authority over the other persons of the Trinity. For example, listen to Jesus’ words in John 5:26-27:

For as the Father has life in himself, so he has granted the Son to have life in himself. And he has given him authority to judge because he is the Son of Man (John 5:26-27).

Jesus taught that his authority to judge the world had been delegated to him by the Father. This authority ultimately resided in the Father, and was his exclusive prerogative. But the Father appointed the Son to judge on his behalf. We find a similar idea in 1 Corinthians 15:24, where Jesus’ kingship over the universe is subordinate to the Father’s greater kingship.
And something similar is true with the Holy Spirit as well. Passages like John 16:13, Romans 8:11, and 1 Peter 1:2 teach that the Holy Spirit also does the will of the Father.
And just as the Son’s authority and the Spirit’s authority are delegated from the Father, the authority of created beings is delegated as well. Angels, earthly rulers, and even average human beings have a measure of authority. But all these types of authority are delegated by God, so that the Father’s authority is always superior to creaturely authority. 


Exhaustive

In addition to having absolute and exclusive authority, the Father also has exhaustive authority over the universe. When we say that God’s authority is exhaustive, we mean that it extends over everything he has created, in every detail. And there are at least two important implications of this fact. First, everyone is under God’s authority. There is no person or other created thing that is free from the obligation to obey God. 
Angels and human beings who are faithful to the Father recognize and submit willingly to him. But demons and unfaithful human beings rebel against him and refuse to submit to his commands. Even so, the Father’s moral judgments apply to everyone. No matter where we live or who we are, and no matter what our culture or religion, we are all accountable to God. 
Second, everything is under God’s authority. His authority extends to every detail of what he has created. Because God has created all things, no aspect of creation is morally neutral. He has created everything for a purpose, and assigned it a moral character. And this means that no matter what the subject, no matter what aspect of creation is in view, there is no moral neutrality. Everything in creation either functions as God wants it to, and is therefore good, or rebels against him, and is therefore evil.
In the modern world many Christians are prone to divide life into things that are sacred and things that are secular. Most of us realize that “sacred” matters like church, worship, evangelism, and Bible study are under the authority of God. We also strive to acknowledge God’s commands in our families and ethical choices, treating them as sacred as well. But many Christians tend to think that God’s commands do not govern so-called “secular” matters like politics, education, and work. But this modern distinction between the sacred world and the secular world is not biblical. Passages like Proverbs 3:6, Ecclesiastes 12:14, and 2 Timothy 3:16-17 indicate that God has spoken about every area of human life, and that his authority extends to everything we do.

In a world where authority is often only thought in negative terms, the authority of God is a great thing for Christians to believe in because God still loves this world. God’s still in control. God knows the end from the beginning. God is the one who will be the judge of all people. And that should make us feel good because we can be confident that somebody knows what he’s doing and that is our trust and our confidence for the future. 

—	Dr. Simon Vibert



CONCLUSION

In this lesson on God the Father, we have looked closely at the first article of faith in the Apostles’ Creed. We have discussed the concept of God that is implied in this article. We have spoken of the Father Almighty as the first person of the Godhead. And we have explored the Father’s role as the Maker of heaven and earth.
Understanding the person of God the Father is foundational to all Christian theology. Unless we know and worship the true Triune God of Scripture, we are worshiping a false God. And recognizing and honoring the person Scripture calls the Father is a critical part of true worship. The Father is the one that the Son and the Holy Spirit obey and honor — the one whose glory they work to increase. And so, he should be the focus of our obedience, honor and glory as well. 
 
