## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. What is a covenant?

2. What was a "suzerain-vassal treaty"? What was a suzerain? A vassal?

3. What was a "parity treaty"? 

4. What was a "universal covenant"? 

5. What was a "national covenant"? 

6. Who is the representative of the new covenant? 

7. Describe each covenant. Give the name for each one as mentioned in the lesson.
	The covenant with Adam.
	The covenant with Noah.
	The covenant with Abraham.
	The covenant with Moses.
	The covenant with David.  
	The covenant of fulfillment in Christ.  

8. Which covenants were "national" covenants? 

9. “The days are coming,” declares the Lord, “when I will make a new  ________with the people of Israel and with the people of Judah” (Jeremiah 31:31)

10. "This is the covenant I will make with the people of Israel after that time … I will put my law in their minds and write it on their _______. I will be their God, and they will be my people. (Jeremiah 31:33)

11. What are the three stages of the unfolding of the new covenant age? 

12. What illustration is used to explain the development of covenant policies over history? 

13. "Each Old Testament covenant had different covenant representatives and focused on policies that were appropriate for a particular time in history. But... there was ______ unity despite these changes."

14. Describe the relationship between the covenants of the Old Testament. What happened to a previous covenant when a new stage was established?

15. How does the lesson explain the relationship of the new covenant with the Old Testament covenants? 
