
## GOALS AND OBJECTIVES

### Goals

In this course, we would like to accomplish the following:

1. We hope you will learn the key information about the background, the contents, and the major themes of each of the gospels.
2. We hope you grow in your desire to know Jesus better and follow Him more faithfully, as you study the gospels.
3. We hope that you will apply to your own life the lessons learned as you study the four gospels, especially that you come to know Jesus better and follow Him more faithfully.
4. We hope you will make use of all the resources of the course to learn key things about the background and content of The Book of Acts.
5. We hope you will become enthusiastic about doing your part to help extend the kingdom of God throughout the world.
6. We hope you make some changes in your life as a response to the teachings of The Book of Acts, especially making a greater effort to do your part in the extension of the kingdom of God.

### Objectives

When you have done the following, it will show that the goals are met:

1. Obtain satisfactory grades on the tests, demonstrating that you can:

* identify key information about the background of each of the four gospels, including their author, the audience, the date of composition, and the purpose
* identify the structure and key contents of each of the four gospels
* identify the major themes of each of the four gospels.
* identify key information about the background, structure, content and themes of The Book of Acts

2. Complete the study guides, expressing your sentiments toward Jesus and the extension of the kingdom of God, and showing how you have applied the teachings of the course to your own life, especially how the course has helped you know Jesus better and follow Him more faithfully, as well as the ways in which the Book of Acts has encouraged you to work for the extension of the kingdom of God.