
	
# New Testament Foundations – Module One – Introduction to the Gospels
## Discussion Questions 

1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	How do we know that the four canonical gospels are authentic? 


3.	How unified is the story told by all four gospels?


4.	What apparent difficulties arise from the variety between the Gospels?


5.	What are the distinctive emphases of each of the four gospels?


6.	Why do you think it was important for God to leave us four gospels?


7.	Does this lesson help buid your confidence in the trustworthiness of the four gospels? 


8.	What difference do you see in the way the gospels of the Bible tell the “good news” and the way in which people often try to explain the gospel?


9.	How should the life-changing accounts of the person and work of Jesus Christ affect the way we live?


10.	How do the Gospels help us understand the historical narratives in the Old Testament?


11.	How can we trust that the Gospels are reliable when they were written by fallen human beings? 


12.	How might the diversity amongst the Gospels help us to appreciate the diversity of the church? 


13.	How does Jesus being the Messianic King of Israel impact your life?
 
REVIEW STATEMENT on APPLICATION – VARIETY – APPARENT DIFFICULTIES: The only way to overcome the flesh and its urgings against being a secondary player in the story is to see the glory of God in Christ in the gospels. It's a vision of the glory of Christ that is designed to evoke faith in people — and to break through our blindness. Matthew focuses on Christ as the King who was promised in the Old Testament who would bring about the glorious kingdom of God. Mark presents him as the one who goes to battle against the evil one and his minions, who suffers, and who overcomes victoriously on behalf of his people. Luke presents him as the compassionate Savior of the world — including of those who are considered unimportant. John presents him as the Son of God who, in view of his unique loving relationship with his Father, is willing to accomplish the Father's plan to rescue his people and thus to make them like himself.

Case Study: Marilyn led a women's Bible Study. She prepared diligently for her studies, but her focus was exclusively on what the woman should and shouldn't do. She treated the Bible like a book of do's and don’ts and not as a story with one main protagonist/hero, enemies, and people to be saved. After studying about the story of the Bible, she began stressing the character, actions and glory of Jesus the hero that was revealed in every passage. She said, "There's one great hero, but it's like he has different clothes on in each passage." She tried to put people in awe of Jesus in the unique ways expressed in each passage, and in that context urged them to "do this" or "don't do that."
## Reflection Questions 
1.	Examine your sermons and/or teaching in the past few months. To what extent have you placed God's requirements for obedience in the context of a vision of the glory of Christ? Give examples of your answer and discuss with your learning community. Consider the following options:
a.	Christ is not mentioned in the sermon/teaching.
b.	Christ is mentioned once.
c.	Christ is mentioned a few times.
d.	Christ is presented mainly as an example to be followed.
e.	Almost exclusively a focus on obedience: what to do and what not to do.
f.	My sermons and teachings are designed to put people in awe of Jesus as the King who brings in the promised kingdom.
g.	Something else?
## Action Assignments
•	Do some informal research among the people of your congregation. Find out in whatever ways are culturally appropriate the main thing that impacted them from your sermon or teaching last week. You could do this over several weeks, asking different people during the week. If you are not a teacher/preacher, you can still do this research. You may or may not feel you can/want to share the results with the pastor. Make sure you do it in a way that is non-judgmental. Adjust the emphasis of your sermons as necessary.
