	
# New Testament Foundations – Module Two – The Gospel of Matthew
## Discussion Questions 

1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	According to Matthew, how do we know that Jesus is the messianic King?


3.	What was the good news that Jesus preached about the kingdom?


4.	How did Jesus spread the kingdom?


5.	What were some specific signs Jesus performed, and what were the reactions to these signs?


6.	According to Matthew, what does it mean to be a faithful disciple?


7.	Why did Matthew emphasize that Jesus fulfilled Old Testament messianic prophecies and expectations?


8.	What are some specific ways you can demonstrate humility in your present circumstances?


9.	How can you demonstrate heartfelt obedience to Jesus in your life today?


10.	What benefits have you seen and experienced from your practice of regularly repenting of and confessing your sins? 


11.	What are some specific ways you can demonstrate love to Christians and non-Christians?


12.	How should it make us feel, knowing that the church belongs to Jesus?


13.	What encouragement should we gain from the fact that we are part of the family of God?
 
REVIEW STATEMENT on MAJOR THEMES – OLD TESTAMENT HERITAGE – UNBELIEVING JEWISH LEADERS: Many Jewish leaders rejected Jesus because he didn't fit their expectation, which had drifted from those of the Old Testament. This misunderstanding provides a caution to everyone who tries to follow Jesus. Their experience warns us that it's easy to let our own ideas of what God's work looks like cloud our vision. It warns us not to place artificial limits on what God can do, but to let him define our hopes and expectations. Jesus knew that his people would be rejected just like he was rejected. For our King, suffering is the path to glory. And the same is true for us.

CASE STUDY: In 1967 Joni Eareckson Tada was in a diving accident that left her a quadriplegic at the age of 17. She struggled with finding meaning in her life. Her hopes and dreams had been dashed. But the Lord was faithful to her. He has given her an amazing worldwide ministry and someday she will also have a new body.
## Reflection Questions
1.	Have you ever had your hopes and dreams dashed? If so, elaborate. How did you react?
2.	Do you know of someone else whose hopes and dreams have been dashed? If so, how did they react?
## Action Assignments
•	When things don't go your way, don't insist that God must do things according to your assumptions of what is good and right and helpful. Don't become discouraged and turn away in bitterness or anger or hopelessness. Trust him, not primarily because of the good things he gives you (because we do suffer) but because of who he is, what he has done by rescuing you through Jesus' death and resurrection, and what he promises to do.
•	Keep a journal for two weeks. Write down your disappointments, how you reacted to them, and how (hopefully) you put your faith to work to press on as God's kingdom agent.

