# Study Guide 

# Biblical Foundations

# Module One – Why Study the Old Testament?

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for this course’s Final Exam.

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 - 25:04

Introduction 

I. Distance from Us 

A. Causes 

1. Organic Inspiration 
2. Divine Accommodation 

B. Kinds 

1. Theological 
2. Cultural 
3. Personal

## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. Indicate the meaning of the following theories of inspiration: organic, mechanical, and romantic. Which of the three theories of inspiration best describes the way the Bible was inspired?      
2. What does it mean that God "accommodates" to man as He communicates to us?     
3. What nation was the primary audience for the Old Testament writings?  
4. According to the lesson, why did God write the Ten Commandments on stones? 
5. What kinds of ancient Near-Eastern literary styles are found in the Old Testament?
6. What three basic types of "distance" does the lesson mention that come between us and the Old Testament? Explain and give examples of each type.
