# Biblical Foundations – Module Seven – The New Covenant
# Discussion Questions 

1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	God administers his kingdom by making covenants through covenant representatives. List and explain the covenants of the Old and New Testaments.


3.	Christ is the new covenant representative of the church. How does this covenant arrangement help you better understand New Testament theology?


4.	How do you deal with your failures in light of God’s kingdom purposes in Christ?


5.	How have your personal failures deepened your appreciation of Christ’s work? 


6.	How does the concept of common grace change the way you think about non-Christians and their contributions to society?


7.	God promised to intervene and write his law on our hearts. What are some specific ways you have experienced this promise in your life?


8.	How can you spread a passion for God so that others will want to be in covenant with him? 


9.	God tests the loyalty of his people. How have the temporary hardships and discipline of God been sanctifying influences on you?


10.	What are some specific ways you can fulfill your covenant obligations to God eagerly and joyfully in your present circumstances?

11.	As true believers, we will receive our eternal inheritance in the glorious new creation. How can you use this promise to motivate yourself and others to persevere?

 
REVIEW STATEMENT: Just as Adam, Noah, Moses, Abraham and David were covenant representatives of God’s people in the Old Testament (pointing to Christ), so Jesus Christ is the covenant representative of God’s people in the New Testament. God the Father administers every dimension of life in the new covenant through Christ as the representative of the church. For this reason, we say the New Testament is Christocentric.
CASE STUDY: When people read a good book or watch a good movie, they usually like to identify with the hero of the story, wishing they were that hero. In fact, that’s often what makes the story so interesting: imagining yourself as the hero. But the story of the Bible is fundamentally different. In the story of the Bible, Jesus Christ is the hero. He’s not just a distant divine hero, but also our human hero. In fact, Adam, Noah, Moses, Abraham and David, as Old Testament covenant representatives, were but pointers to Christ, the true hero of the story. As a result, many people who say they have a hard time understanding the Bible are really complaining — probably without realizing it — that the narrative of the Bible doesn’t allow them to be the hero.

## REFLECTION QUESTIONS:
1.	When you read the Bible, whom do you see as the hero? In your learning community, discuss the following: In spite of the Christocentric character of the New Testament (as well as of the Old Testament), many people try to force the narrative of the Bible into their self-centered perspective. So they read it to say things it was not designed to say, like:
a.	I am somebody special because I am holy.
b.	I am somebody special because I am loving.
c.	I am somebody special because I am truthful.
d.	I am somebody special because I am _________.
2.	Discuss in your learning community the ways in which Christ is the one who is truly holy, loving, truthful, discerning, brave and _____________ (fill in the blank). 
3.	Make a list of some heroes within your culture. These could be (1) historical figures, (2) people who are currently living, (3) types of people (people who do or are __________ ), or (4) characters in movies or stories. Then compare and contrast Christ’s heroism with that of these cultural heroes. As you spend time on this exercise you should find a sense of awe for Jesus building within you.
Action Assignments
•	Ask everyone in your learning community to talk to at least 5 willing unbelievers and find out who their hero is. It would be easier to talk to people you already know. But if you don’t know many unbelievers, you could approach them as someone who is doing research (which would be true). Their hero might be a specific person or it might be a type of person. Or they might say they don’t have a hero. Ask for the reasons for their answer. Ask if they have ever thought of Jesus as a hero, and ask them to explain why or why not. Write up the results of your research. On the basis of your research write up an outline for a gospel presentation that in some way presents Jesus as the hero. 
