# Biblical Foundations – Module Three – Divine Covenants
# Discussion Questions 

1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	How did the universal, national and new covenants move God’s kingdom purposes forward? 


3.	For whom were the promises of the universal, national and new covenants written?


4.	What covenant promises has God made with you regarding your salvation?


5.	How does the study of the covenants affect your view of God and your relationship with Him?


6.	In what ways do you see incorrect views of the meaning of salvation today? How does the study of the covenant help correct these errors?


7.	What practical benefits do we have in the New Covenant?


8.	What practical differences are there for us who live on this historical side of the cross?


9.	How has this section changed your view of people inside and outside the Church?


10.	In this study, we have seen that all covenants are dependent upon the grace and mercy of God. Why is it significant to recall this fundamental element of covenants as we explore the requirement of loyal obedience and the consequences due to loyalty and disloyalty? 


11.	All biblical covenants contained consequences of blessing and cursing. What are some ways you can see this dynamic at work in the modern world? In your church? In your own life? 
 
REVIEW STATEMENT: HISTORY OF THE COVENANTS: We learned in this lesson that God relates consistently with his people, but in slightly different ways in different stages of history. 

CASE STUDY: Elizabeth loved her children and loved to have them close. She was very careful to give them great care and was always taking care of their every need. She hated to see them get more and more independent as they got older and often treated them as if they were younger and needed her in the same ways. Her children complained that she wasn’t letting them grow up, and she tried to change her ways but found it difficult.

## REFLECTION QUESTIONS:
1.	According to Galatians 3:23-26 the Old Testament served as a guardian to bring us to Christ. The word “guardian” implies discipline and care of minors. There is a sense in which the people in the Old Testament were “children” under the guardianship of a disciplinarian. The law served that function. Now that Christ has come, says the apostle Paul, we are adults. The law is still useful, but now in Christ there is a focus on the inner motivation of adults vs. the outer control of a guardian. We have the indwelling Spirit. 
2.	Imagine parents who never change how they relate to their children as these children grow and go through different stages of development.
a.	What would be the consequences?
b.	In what ways should they remain the same as they bring up their children?
c.	In what ways should they change? 
d.	Discuss ways in which we should expect God (a) to remain the same as his plan for humanity develops, and (b) to have different expressions of the way he relates to humanity and his people during this same process.
3.	Using this lesson as your basis, what would be your pastoral response if someone said to you:
a.	 “In the Old Testament people were saved by works, and in the New Testament we are saved by grace”?
b.	 “In the Old Testament God was harsh and just, and in the New Testament God is loving and kind”?
4.	How would you respond pastorally to this statement: “Everyone who has been baptized — and therefore a member of the New Covenant — is a true believer and regenerate”?
5.	How would you respond pastorally to this statement: “I went forward to accept Christ when I was 12, so I know I’m going to heaven because, as they say, ‘Once saved always saved.’”?
Action Assignments
As you study the Bible, look for the continuity of character in God, but also look for the different ways he deals with his people in different epochs, depending on the amount of revelation they have received. 
