## BACKGROUND
	
> A lot of people ask the question, “Why do I need to know all of this contextual stuff about the Bible? Can’t I just read the Bible in a good English translation and figure out what it means?” I like to say a text without a context is just a pretext for whatever you want it to mean. The problem is that all ancient texts are given in certain kinds of historical, literary, rhetorical, archeological, religious context, and those contexts are all different from ours. The past is very different from the present and the greatest hedge we have against anachronism, a reading back into the past all of our modern assumptions, is careful contextual study of the Bible. 
> 
> —	Dr. Ben Witherington III


> It’s important to understand background issues such as who the author is and what the historical context is when we’re interpreting books of the Bible precisely because when authors write books, they assume that their audience is operating in a shared culture, and they take for granted that their audience is going to know much of the broader context of the statements that they make. And so, our task, in many cases, is to discern who this author is and what his culture is so that we can get some more light from the broader culture and history so that we can fill in some of these assumptions and given realities. 
> 
> —	Dr. James M. Hamilton 

We’ll discuss the background of Matthew’s gospel in three steps. First, we’ll speak of Matthew as the author of the work. Second, we’ll talk about Matthew’s original audience. And third, we’ll look at the occasion or circumstances in which Matthew wrote. Let’s turn first to the question of the author of this gospel.


### AUTHOR

Whenever we study a book, or a letter, or any other writing, it’s helpful to know who wrote it. After all, the more we know about an author and his context, the better prepared we are to understand his perspectives and meaning. And the same is true when we study the Bible. The more we know about biblical authors, the better prepared we are to understand the lessons they are teaching us. So, as we approach the Gospel of Matthew, one of the first questions we want to ask is “Who wrote this book?”
	We’ll consider the author of the Gospel According to Matthew in two stages. First, we’ll affirm the traditional view that this book was written by the apostle Matthew, who was one of Jesus’ original twelve disciples. And second, we’ll explore Matthew’s personal history. Let’s start with the traditional view that this gospel was written by Matthew.


#### Traditional View

> I think we can have a lot of confidence that Matthew, the apostle Matthew, really is the author of the Gospel of Matthew, though some scholars today doubt that. For one thing, we know that the early church fathers were very skeptical — in fact, that’s an understatement actually — that they were absolutely opposed to accepting forgeries as being authentic, canonical works, as belonging to the inspired collection of Scriptures. Secondly, there’s absolutely no competing tradition regarding the authorship of Matthew. The only tradition we have is that Matthew wrote this book. Thirdly, if the early church were going to associate the name of someone with this gospel for anything other than historical reasons, just make up a name, or just pick one of the apostles out of a hat, to attach to this book, they made a poor choice with Matthew. The reason is because Matthew was a tax collector. He followed a profession that was absolutely despised by the Jewish people. And yet Matthew’s gospel is a gospel that is written to a Jewish audience, trying to convince them that Jesus is the Messiah. So, we have this gospel written to Jews to convince them that Jesus is the Messiah, and they’re going to pick Matthew to be the writer of this gospel? That makes no sense at all. The only reason they would associate Matthew’s name with the Gospel of Matthew is if they had good, strong reason to believe that Matthew actually wrote it. 
> 
> —	Dr. Steven Cowan

The traditional view that Matthew wrote the first gospel comes from the earliest centuries of the church. In every ancient manuscript of this gospel that contains a title, the title attributes the book to Matthew and only to Matthew. We have no evidence that this gospel ever circulated among the churches without Matthew’s name attached to it. 
	One of the earliest people to attribute the first gospel to Matthew was Papias of Hierapolis. Papias lived from the end of the first century into the second century. He represents viewpoints from the earliest period of the church to which we have access.
	The church historian Eusebius of Caesarea, who wrote around A.D 325, recorded Papias’ testimony regarding the authorship of Matthew’s gospel in his Ecclesiastical History, book 3, 39, section 16. Listen to Papias’ words:

**Matthew put the logia in an ordered arrangement.** 

Here we see that early in the second century, Papias attributed the gospel to Matthew. It’s also worth noting that Eusebius quoted Papias in order to corroborate his own view that Matthew wrote the first gospel.
	Another early church father — Irenaeus of Lyons — who wrote around A.D. 180, also attributed the first gospel to Matthew. Listen to what he wrote in Against Heresies, book 3, 1, section 1:

> Matthew also issued a written Gospel among the Hebrews in their own dialect, while Peter and Paul were preaching at Rome, and laying the foundations of the Church.

Tertullian lived a little later, from AD 155 to 230. He affirmed Matthew’s authorship in his work Against Marcion, book 4, chapter 2:

> Of the apostles, therefore, John and Matthew first instill faith into us … Luke and Mark renew it afterwards.

As far as Irenaeus and Tertullian were concerned, Matthew wrote this gospel. And their conviction was shared by the early church. Matthew’s authorship of the first gospel was accepted as a certainty. 
It’s also important to realize that these early claims of Matthew’s authorship are strengthened by Matthew’s relative obscurity. Presumably, if the church or someone else had wanted to give credibility to a gospel by attributing it to an apostle of their own choosing, they would probably have chosen one of the more prominent apostles. But Matthew is rarely mentioned in the Gospels. This makes it unlikely that his name was falsely attached to this gospel.

> First of all, we have to recognize the importance of eyewitness testimony in the first century. Eyewitness testimony was very highly regarded, and no one claiming eyewitness testimony was taken lightly. It’s almost, if you will, a sacred category of saying things about things that happened. We also know that in the early second century, a fellow named Papias wrote that the Gospel of Matthew was by the apostle Matthew. And Papias would have very likely known apostles firsthand because of his lifespan. The final reason I would say that we can be confident that the Gospel of Matthew is by the apostle Matthew is that even though Matthew’s name is not mentioned in the text of the Gospel of Matthew, the fact is that the Gospel of Matthew from our earliest records never circulated without Matthew the apostle’s name associated with it as its author and authority. 
> 
> —	Rev. Michael J. Glodo

	Of course, some modern critical scholars have doubted that the apostle Matthew wrote the first gospel, just as they have questioned many other traditional views of biblical authorship. But the overall strength of the ancient attestation to Matthew as the author of this gospel, together with the complete absence of any ancient challenges, gives us strong reason to believe that he wrote this book.
	Now that we have looked at the traditional view that Matthew wrote this first gospel, we should turn to Matthew’s personal history.
