#### Personal History

Scripture tells us a few important facts about Matthew’s personal history. For instance, it mentions that he was both a Jew and a tax collector. We’ll consider both of these details, beginning with the fact that Matthew was a Jew.
	Matthew’s Jewish heritage is revealed in a number of ways. For one thing, he was one of Jesus’ twelve disciples, who were all Jewish. For another, Matthew had Jewish names. The name Matthew is itself a Jewish name, derived from the Hebrew Old Testament. And his other name, Levi, which we find in Mark 2:14 and Luke 5:28, was the name of one of the tribes of Israel. So, both names demonstrate that Matthew was Jewish. Matthew’s Jewish ancestry may also be implied by ancient Christian reports that he wrote in Hebrew.
	Matthew’s Jewish heritage is important background for understanding his gospel because it helps us interpret his distinctly Jewish emphasis. We’ll study the Jewish character of this gospel in greater detail later in this lesson. So for now, we’ll mention only one example for the sake of illustration. 
In Matthew 15:24, Matthew reported that Jesus made the following claim:

> I was sent only to the lost sheep of Israel (Matthew 15:24).

More than any other gospel, Matthew emphasized that Jesus had come particularly to the nation of Israel. 
	Besides Matthew’s Jewish heritage, another detail of his life worth noting is that he was a tax collector. In the first century, many Jews in Palestine collected taxes on behalf of the Roman Empire. Some of these tax collectors collected tariffs on goods that moved from one area to another. They were private entrepreneurs who paid the rulers for the authority to collect taxes. They made their profit by inflating the taxes they collected from the people. As a result, these tax collectors were seen as extortionists and thieves — and this reputation was often justified. 
	For this reason, Jewish tax collectors were doubly guilty in the eyes of their countrymen. First, they were the agents of the hated occupying forces of Rome. And second, they robbed their own people for the sake of personal gain. In fact, they were considered to be so evil and untrustworthy that early rabbinic writings prohibited them from testifying in a Jewish court. Moreover, lying to tax collectors was approved and even praised as an act of justified rebellion. 
Listen to the way Matthew recorded his own call from Jesus in Matthew 9:9-10:

> Jesus … saw a man named Matthew sitting at the tax collector’s booth. “Follow me,” he told him, and Matthew got up and followed him. While Jesus was having dinner at Matthew’s house, many tax collectors and “sinners” came and ate with him and his disciples (Matthew 9:9-10).

Matthew was very candid in his description of himself, and openly admitted that he and other tax collectors were associated with “sinners” in Jesus’ day. By doing so, Matthew put himself, Jesus, and his written gospel at odds with the Jewish leadership. This division is often expressed in Matthew’s gospel. For example, listen to the way Jesus criticized the Jewish leadership in Matthew 21:31-32:

> I tell you the truth, the tax collectors and the prostitutes are entering the kingdom of God ahead of you. For John came to you to show you the way of righteousness, and you did not believe him, but the tax collectors and the prostitutes did. And even after you saw this, you did not repent and believe him (Matthew 21:31-32).
	
Matthew’s willingness to speak openly about his sinful personal history may also be related to another emphasis of his gospel, which we will look at more closely later in this lesson. Matthew, more than any other gospel writer, stressed the fact that Jesus was a humble king who called for humility in his followers. By acknowledging his past, Matthew freely admitted his own need for grace, and proclaimed his willingness to follow the King that had called and changed him. Jesus had transformed him from a sinful servant of Herod into a humble servant of the gospel of the kingdom of heaven.

> In our lives, humility should look like we are glad, we are satisfied when good things are happening for other people, for ourselves as well, but when other people are progressing, when other people are in some sense finding honor or their works are shown to be fruitful, we are glad in that. We are thankful to God for that, and we want to honor and thank God in the first place. We want to live for God’s sake above all, not simply for our sake. So, humility is going to be that — not looking to my interests being fulfilled, but looking, in the first place, God’s interests being fulfilled, whether that’s through somebody else, or through me. 
> 
> —	Dr. John E. McKinley

Now that we’ve concluded that the traditional view that Matthew wrote the first gospel is correct, and become familiar with a little of his personal history, we’ll explore the identity of the original audience for whom Matthew wrote.


### ORIGINAL AUDIENCE

Matthew did not specifically identify his original audience. But he did give us a few clues about them. As we’ll see, Matthew appears to have written primarily for Jewish Christians.
	As we mentioned in a prior lesson, all the Gospels were written specifically for Christian audiences. But several emphases in Matthew’s gospel make it particularly well-suited for a Christian audience from a Jewish background. For example, Matthew quoted the Old Testament more than any other gospel writer. He frequently pointed out the ways in which Jesus fulfilled Old Testament expectations. And he especially emphasized that Jesus was the messianic King the Jews had awaited for centuries. His emphasis on Jewish issues also appears in Jesus’ conflicts with the unbelieving leaders of the Jews, which Matthew described in more detail than the other gospel writers did. And Matthew also put the greatest focus on Jesus’ relationship to the Old Testament law, especially as its Lord. 
Later in this lesson we’ll look at some of these emphases in greater detail. So, at this point, we’ll simply mention two examples that suggest Matthew wrote to a Jewish audience, beginning with Matthew’s use of the phrase “kingdom of heaven.”


#### Kingdom of Heaven

In a prior lesson, we noted that all four gospels are unified by the theme of the kingdom of God. But Matthew rarely used the phrase “kingdom of God.” Instead he generally used the phrase “kingdom of heaven.” The Gospel of Matthew is the only book in the Bible that uses this terminology. And as we have seen, both phrases mean the same thing. 
Out of reverence for God, the Jews often avoided using the divine name — or anything close to it — so that they would not accidentally take God’s name in vain. One way that they did this was by replacing the word “God” with the word “heaven.” And this is precisely what Matthew did when he used the phrase “kingdom of heaven.” When we compare parallel passages in the Synoptic Gospels, we see that where the other gospel writers used the term “kingdom of God,” Matthew used the phrase “kingdom of heaven.”

> Matthew uses the phrase, “kingdom of heaven,” almost the whole time in his gospel for what we, in the other gospels, refer to as the “kingdom of God.” I think that there’s a couple of occasions where Matthew uses the phrase, “kingdom of God,” but it’s because Matthew is a Jewish writer, a Jewish believer in Christ, and for Jews, the name of God was something almost too holy to use. So, to use the phrase “heaven” is another way of referring to God. We read in another gospel, “I have sinned against heaven and against earth.” It means, “I have sinned against God.” And, the danger is that when we hear the phrase, “kingdom of heaven,” we mishear that and think, “Oh, it sounds rather ethereal and anemic… the kingdom of heaven — can’t see that.” But in fact, he was talking about the kingdom of God, with the idea that God really now is becoming King of this world through Jesus Christ. So, there’s a real danger of Christians later to mishear “kingdom of heaven.” Actually, Jesus is saying, God is King, and is becoming King through me. 
> 
> —	Dr. Peter Walker

Listen to Mark’s record of the parable of the mustard seed in Mark 4:30-31:

> [Jesus] said: “What shall we say the kingdom of God is like, or what parable shall we use to describe it? It is like a mustard seed, which is the smallest seed you plant in the ground” (Mark 4:30-31).

Here Mark used the normal form of the phrase: kingdom of God. But listen to Matthew’s version of the parable in Matthew 13:31: 

> [Jesus] told them another parable: “The kingdom of heaven is like a mustard seed, which a man took and planted in his field” (Matthew 13:31).

When Matthew recounted this same event, he used the term “kingdom of heaven” where Mark had used the term “kingdom of God.” 

> When you compare what Matthew calls the kingdom of heaven with other places where Mark and Luke have the very same passage and call it the kingdom of God, that’s one of the definitive ways to see that they have the same reference, that they refer to the same thing. Well, when you read Matthew overall, you’ll see that there’s a major theme of contrasting God in heaven with humanity on earth. God’s way of doing kingdom, which he calls the kingdom of heaven, and humanity’s way of ruling and reigning and acting and behaving towards each other, which we might call the kingdoms of this world. And for Matthew to talk about the kingdom of heaven is a very powerful way for him to feel the difference between merely the things of this world, and our Father in heaven who reigns and rules and promises to come again. So, the point of the kingdom of heaven in Matthew’s language is to let us feel and taste the difference between God’s reign that is still yet to come, and all the reigns and ruling and behavior of this earth, there’s a contrast between those two realities, and Matthew using “kingdom of heaven,” helps us feel and taste and hope in that time coming for God’s kingdom of heaven. 
> 
> —	Dr. Jonathan T. Pennington

Many scholars believe that Matthew preserved the way Jesus spoke to Jewish crowds, and that Mark and other New Testament writers used the phrase “kingdom of God” in order to make Jesus’ meaning more clear to broader audiences. But whether or not this is true, Matthew’s use of the phrase “kingdom of heaven” adds weight to the view that his original audience was Jewish.
