## STRUCTURE AND CONTENT

There is considerable agreement among scholars about some of the features of the structure of the Gospel of Matthew. And this agreement is due to the fact that Matthew has given us a very helpful key. At five different points, he uses a phrase such as, “When Jesus had finished saying these things…” to indicate major transitions in the gospel. Sometimes a statement like this appears as the last sentence of a division, and at other times it’s the first sentence of a new division. But it always indicates a major transition.
Following these structural markers, most scholars agree that the Gospel of Matthew divides into seven sections. There are five major sections set off by transitional statements in Matthew 7:28; 11:1; 13:53; 19:1 and 26:1. And Matthew also included an introductory narrative, and a concluding narrative.

* The gospel begins with a narrative introduction that presents Jesus as the messianic King in Matthew 1:1–2:23.
* The first major division describes the gospel of the kingdom in Matthew 3:1–7:29.
* The second major division focuses on the spread of the kingdom in Matthew 8:1–11:1.
* The third major division records the signs and parables of the kingdom in Matthew 11:2–13:53.
* The fourth major division of Matthew’s account focuses on faith and greatness beginning in 13:54 and continuing through 18:35. 
* The fifth and last major division is about the present opposition to the kingdom and the future victory of the kingdom in Matthew 19:1–25:46.
* Finally, there is a conclusion that narrates the King’s death and resurrection in Matthew 26:1–28:20. 

Each of these sections of Matthew’s gospel furthers the story of Jesus, the messianic King that brought the kingdom of heaven to earth. Let’s take a closer look at each of these sections, beginning with the introduction in Matthew 1:1–2:23.

### INTRODUCTION: THE MESSIANIC KING

The Introduction to Matthew’s gospel introduces us to Jesus as the messianic King, and is made up of two sections: a genealogy and an infancy narrative.


#### Genealogy

The genealogy is found in Matthew 1:1-17. Technically, the first verse is actually an introduction or title, in which Matthew summarized his main point, namely, that Jesus is the messianic King of Israel. Matthew 1:1 reads as follows:

> A record of the genealogy of Jesus Christ the son of David, the son of Abraham (Matthew 1:1).

From the very beginning, Matthew placed special emphasis on David the King of Israel, and on Abraham the father of the Jewish people.
	Following this introductory statement, the genealogy itself begins in verse 2. According to Matthew 1:17, the genealogy is arranged in three segments, each containing fourteen generations. The first began with God’s covenant with Abraham, in which Abraham was promised that his descendants would rule the world.
The second segment begins with King David and with God’s promise to fulfill his covenant with Abraham by establishing David’s dynasty forever. This second segment ends with God’s people being exiled from the Promised Land because of their sin and covenant breaking.
The third segment of the genealogy runs from the exile to the birth of Jesus. Israel had broken God’s covenant and fallen under his covenant curses. But God still intended to bless Israel by fulfilling the promises he had made to Abraham and David. The past kings of Israel had failed. But now the last King of Israel, the one who would fulfill Israel’s destiny, had finally come. The list of Jesus’ ancestors ends in Matthew 1:16, where we read these words:

> Jacob [was] the father of Joseph, the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ (Matthew 1:16).

In this way, Matthew proved that Jesus had a fully legal claim to David’s throne through his father Joseph.

> The Messiah had to be a descendant of David because of prophetic revelation basically because it was predicted so. And that goes all the way back to Genesis. Every king that followed David was compared to him either favorably or unfavorably. Then, of course, we have the covenant made with David himself. When David proposed to Nathan, the prophet, to build a house for the Lord, to build the temple, Nathan came back and said, “You’re not going to build a house for the Lord; the Lord is going to build a house for you.” And by house, he meant dynasty. It’s in 2 Samuel 7, and that prophecy that God would build a house for him, would establish his kingdom forever, that his descendant would reign forever on David’s throne, became the foundation for the messianic prophecies that followed. And so, when the prophets referred back after the collapse — especially of the Davidic dynasty, the Davidic kingdom — when they referred back and looked forward to the hope that God would restore the glories of the Davidic dynasty, it was through the line of David that God would raise up a king. And so, the King, the Messiah, had to come through the line of David. 
> 
> —	Dr. Mark L. Strauss

Following Jesus’ genealogy, we find his infancy narrative.


#### Infancy Narrative

Jesus’ infancy narrative runs from Matthew 1:18–2:23. This section is fairly brief, only 31 verses, compared to 116 verses in the Gospel of Luke. In this section, Matthew’s purpose was quite limited. Each of the five short paragraphs was designed to focus attention on one central fact: Jesus the Messiah had been born. Each paragraph tells a brief story, and then explains how that story fulfills the Old Testament expectations for the Messiah.
One of the most interesting things we learn in Jesus’ infancy narrative is that he didn’t have a human father. Instead, God was his father — literally. The Holy Spirit caused Mary to conceive Jesus even though she was still a virgin.
Now, some critics of Christianity have suggested that this is a weakness in Jesus’ genealogy, since he wasn’t physically a descendant of Joseph, through whom he claimed the throne of David. But it’s a well-recognized fact that biblical genealogies, such as those in 1 Chronicles 1–9, often trace ancestries through adoptive parents. 
Moreover, because Jesus was the Son of God, he was also fully divine. And this meant that he was able to keep God’s covenant perfectly. Merely human kings had never perfectly obeyed God’s covenant. And therefore, they had never been able to inherit the full covenant blessings God had promised to Abraham and David. So, God sent his perfect Son to be King, in order to ensure that his covenant would be kept, so that his promises of blessing would be fulfilled.

> It's very clear that the Messiah comes through David's line as human. And there's a lot of important truths there. But it's also crucial to realize that the Messiah also has to be God, has to be divine. Why is that the case? Well, ultimately, it's because our problem as human beings before God is that we have sinned against him. He must provide the answer. He must provide the solution. The problem of forgiveness that we want to sometimes speak about, is that our sin before God isn't something that he can overlook. It's not something that he can say, “I'll grade on the curve,” or “You do your best.” God is a holy God. God is righteous and just. We cannot simply have him overlook our sin. That would be a denial of himself. So, to forgive us, he must take the initiative. He must provide, ultimately, the solution to the satisfaction of his own righteous requirements. God himself must do it. Now, when you read the Old Testament, this comes through over and over again. You think of, say, of Jonah 2:9: “Salvation is of the Lord.” It's God himself that must provide. It's God himself that must provide the solution. It's God himself that must forgive. So that if there is going to be salvation through the Messiah, he must represent us — be human. Yet, he also must be the Lord. The Lord who comes. The Lord who saves. The Lord who satisfies his holiness and righteousness, and that is why the Messiah must be divine. 
> 
> —	Dr. Stephen J. Wellum

In the introduction to his gospel, Matthew presented Jesus as the messianic King, the royal Son of David who received all the blessings God had promised to Abraham and the people of Israel. In this way, Matthew set the stage for the amazing good news that is the subject of the rest of his book.
Following the introduction are the five major literary divisions of the gospel. Each of these five divisions is composed of two parts: a narrative section, in which Matthew described what Jesus did, followed by a discourse section, in which Matthew reported what Jesus said.
