### THE GOSPEL OF THE KINGDOM 

The first major division of Matthew’s gospel tells the story of the gospel of the kingdom of heaven. This section extends from Matthew 3:1–7:29.


#### The Messiah had Come 

The narrative portion begins in Matthew 3:1 and ends in 4:25. Here, Matthew proclaimed that the messianic King had come, and that he had brought the kingdom of heaven to earth. 
The first section of the narrative is Matthew 3:1-12, where John the Baptist announced that God’s Messiah would soon come and baptize his faithful people with the Holy Spirit. For 400 years, the Holy Spirit had been relatively inactive in Israel because of God’s judgment against his wayward people. But now, just as Old Testament prophets had predicted, a new day was about to dawn when God’s Spirit would be poured out.
	 The narrative continues with Jesus’ baptism in Matthew 3:13-17. In this event, the Holy Spirit descended on Jesus, anointing him for his messianic ministry, and the Father announced from heaven, “This is my Son,” applying to Jesus the royal title from Psalm 2:7.
	The divine voice also alluded to the suffering servant of Isaiah 42:1-2 by describing Jesus as the one “whom I love; with him I am well pleased.” Jesus was the royal Messiah, but he would be a different kind of King. He would fulfill his calling through suffering. 
	In the next story in the narrative, found in Matthew 4:1-11, Satan challenged Jesus’ commitment to this role of a royal suffering Messiah. Three times he tempted Jesus to be a Messiah without suffering, essentially saying, “Don’t be hungry like a man. Astonish people into believing without pain. Rule the nations without suffering.” But each time Jesus rejected the easy path that would have denied the character of his suffering messiahship.
Then in Matthew 4:12-17, Jesus began his public messianic mission by preaching the gospel of the kingdom. Listen to how Matthew summarized Jesus’ message in Matthew 4:17:
 
> From that time on Jesus began to preach, “Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is near” (Matthew 4:17).

According to Matthew, the good news that Jesus preached was that the kingdom of heaven was near — that through his own ministry, Jesus was about to bring the kingdom of heaven to earth. And this kingdom was available to all who would repent of their sin and faithfully follow Jesus as king.

> The “kingdom of heaven” is used in Matthew’s gospel, and only in Matthew’s gospel, I think synonymously with the “kingdom of God.” I would agree with most scholars who say there’s no difference between them. The fact that it is described by Jesus as being near, or as some translations have it, “at hand,” indicates that the end-time rule of God has in some sense already come in the person and work of Jesus. But there’s a sense in which it awaits its completion. The technical term is “consummation,” which will happen at the second coming of Christ, so that Christians then live in a rather — to use a technical expression — a rather dialectical existence. They have one foot in God’s end time kingdom, but there is another foot that is not yet within God’s end time kingdom. And a great deal of the challenge of Christian discipleship is negotiating in terms of life and life decisions and how we think about life, what it means that the kingdom of heaven is already here in some sense and what it means on the other hand that it is not yet fully appeared. 
> 
> —	Dr. David R. Bauer


> When Jesus went preaching from village to village in the Gospels, “Repent for the kingdom of God is at hand,” or “is near,” he was saying a couple of things. He was saying, first of all, that in him the kingdom of God was present, was in their midst. And that’s something that he showed and demonstrated by his authoritative teaching, by casting out demons and taking authority over the demons, and also through his healing ministry as well. So, the first thing Jesus was saying was that the kingdom and the authority of the King is present in me, right here in your midst. But the other thing that he was saying is that the kingdom is coming; the kingdom is not yet here in its fullness, but at one time in the future the fullness of God’s reign will be visible to everyone. So that’s what Jesus was talking about when he was saying, “the kingdom of God is near.” So, by calling people to repent because the kingdom of God was near, he was calling them to submit to the king, that by their submission, by their obedience, by literally following the King they were then being incorporated, or reincorporated, into the covenant people of God. So, it’s that sort of submission to the King that is signified by repentance. 
> 
> —	Dr. Gregory R. Perry

In Matthew 4:18-22, Jesus called his disciples. The picture is one of the messianic King recruiting the leaders of his kingdom. Following this, in Matthew 4:23-25, Matthew gave a preview of the next two sections of the gospel. He announced that Jesus traveled throughout Galilee teaching and healing the crowds. Matthew 5–7 illustrate Jesus’ teaching, while chapters 8–9 illustrate his healing. 
	Now that we’ve looked at Matthew’s narrative on the gospel of the kingdom, let’s turn to the accompanying discourse that appears in Matthew 5:1–7:29. 


#### Sermon on the Mount 

This discourse is commonly called the Sermon on the Mount. In this teaching, Jesus described the righteous lives of kingdom citizens. He explicitly mentioned the kingdom seven times, and the entire sermon revolves around this theme.
	Time after time, Jesus stressed that the challenges of righteousness were far greater than the leaders of Judaism had imagined. He also stressed that the heavenly Father of the citizens of the kingdom was closer and more ready to bless than they ever imagined. It’s the combination of these twin thoughts that gives the sermon its distinctive character.
	Consider just one example from the Sermon on the Mount: Jesus’ teaching on adultery. Jesus taught that the law of God demanded more than a surface reading might indicate, and more than the Jewish teachers commonly taught. Listen to what Jesus said in Matthew 5:27-28:

> You have heard that it was said, “Do not commit adultery.” But I tell you that anyone who looks at a woman lustfully has already committed adultery with her in his heart (Matthew 5:27-28).

When Jesus referred to what was “said,” he was talking about common interpretations of Scripture among the Jewish rabbis of the day. Some rabbis taught that the Old Testament commandments prohibited adultery, but they failed to address the more fundamental issue of the human heart. But Jesus pointed out something that was true even in the days of the Old Testament: God is not just interested in controlling outward behavior; he wants obedience to begin in the heart.

> I think sometimes we can have a perspective on the Old Testament versus the New Testament where we think, in the Old Testament God required these external signs: he wanted people to be circumcised, he wanted sacrifice, he wanted them to observe special days. And that was a sort of an external religious expression. And then in the New Testament this is now as a religion of the heart. God wants our hearts; he wants our affections. But that won’t work, I don’t think, when one begins to look closely at the material in the Old Testament, especially in the prophets. The prophet Joel, for example, says, “Rend your hearts, not your garments,” which is a direct statement against an external religion, where God didn’t just want their external forms of expression to him, but he wanted their hearts, he wanted what was internal to them, what made them who they were. You see this as well, for example, in Psalm 103. “Bless the Lord, O my soul. All that is within me bless his holy name.” I mean, here the psalmist is calling on the people of God to bless him, to worship the Lord with everything that makes them who they are. So, this sort of idea that the affections is something that’s in the New Testament and heartfelt religion’s not in the Old Testament, doesn’t do justice to the full orbed reality of God’s covenantal involvement with his people in the Old Testament. 
> 
> —	Dr. Mark Gignilliat
	
Jesus’ emphasis on heartfelt obedience led him to describe the citizens of the kingdom as “meek” in 5:5, as “those who hunger and thirst for righteousness” in 5:6, and as “pure in heart” in 5:8. Now, of course, Jesus knew that his followers would not be completely changed into these kinds of citizens until the kingdom of heaven had come in all its fullness. But he still exhorted them to be righteous before then. Listen to what he said in Matthew 5:48:

> Be perfect, therefore, as your heavenly Father is perfect (Matthew 5:48).

In one sense, this command is impossible to fulfill — no one can be as perfect as God is. But that shouldn’t lead us to despair. On the contrary, Jesus also gave us a gracious, encouraging promise. Throughout his sermon, he assured his faithful followers that the kingdom already belongs to us.
	For instance, in the Beatitudes, found in Matthew 5:3-10, we find eight blessings. The six in the middle promise that the blessings will be received on that future day when the kingdom of heaven comes in all its fullness. But the first and the last blessings are different — Jesus said his people already have these blessings of the kingdom. Listen to the way Jesus stated these blessings in Matthew 5:3, 10:

> Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven… Blessed are those who are persecuted because of righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven (Matthew 5:3, 10).

The truly great challenge of following Jesus is matched by the equally great promise that God’s kingdom power is already transforming us into righteous citizens of his kingdom.
	In the first major division of his gospel, Matthew emphasized the gospel of the kingdom by drawing attention to the purpose and message of Jesus’ ministry. Jesus was the messianic King that brought the kingdom of heaven to the people of God. He taught them about the life-transforming power of that kingdom. And he promised them that if they were faithful, they would inherit the great blessings of the kingdom when it came in all of its fullness.
