### PRESENT OPPOSITION AND FUTURE VICTORY

The theme of the fifth major division of Matthew’s gospel is the present opposition to the kingdom of heaven, and its future victory. This narrative extends from 19:1–22:46 and shows how Jesus faced great opposition at this point in his life.


#### Intensifying Opposition

These chapters divide into three main sections based on Jesus’ movement. In 19:1–20:16, Jesus faced opposition in Judea. There he dealt with Pharisees and the question of divorce. He also dealt with opposition that grew out of misunderstandings of riches and power. 
	Earlier in the gospel, Matthew had noted the beginning stage of the tensions between Jesus and the Jewish leaders. In this section, he reported that full hostility had developed. For instance, the Pharisees sometimes asked questions designed to trap Jesus, as in Matthew 19:3-9; 21:16, 23; and 22:15-40. As just one example, listen to Matthew’s report in Matthew 22:15:

> Then the Pharisees went out and laid plans to trap him in his words (Matthew 22:15).

At the same time, Jesus sometimes challenged the Jewish leaders. We see this in the parables of the two sons, the tenant farmers, and the wedding banquet in 21:28–22:15.
	But the conflict wasn’t always limited to verbal exchanges. Sometimes it was more direct and forceful, as when Jesus overturned the tables of the money changers and drove them out of the temple in Matthew 21:12-16. Especially biting were his words in the seven cursing woes of 23:13-35. Listen to how Jesus rebuked them in Matthew 23:15:

> “Woe to you, teachers of the law and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You travel over land and sea to win a single convert, and when he becomes one, you make him twice as much a son of hell as you are” (Matthew 23:15).

Of course, Jesus and the Jewish leaders were not the only characters in these chapters. The hostility of the Jewish leaders was aggravated by the way the crowds still honored Jesus on occasions such as the triumphal entry in 21:1-11.
	Throughout this section Jesus encouraged his disciples to put this confrontation into perspective. In Matthew 19:27-30, he promised that one day they would sit with him in glory. But in 20:17-19, he also warned them that those glorious days would only come after his own suffering death.
	Moreover, Jesus insisted that his disciples would reach glory only after a life of humble suffering. Jesus drove home this point three different times. In Matthew 19:30, Jesus said:

> Many who are first will be last, and many who are last will be first (Matthew 19:30).

Then in Matthew 20:16, he said:

> The last will be first, and the first will be last (Matthew 20:16).

And he repeated this in Matthew 20:26-28, saying: 

> Whoever wants to become great among you must be your servant, and whoever wants to be first must be your slave — just as the Son of Man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many (Matthew 20:26-28).

Jesus’ kingdom looked strange. His followers would suffer, and the King of Israel himself would be killed by the people of Israel. Apparent defeat would come before victory.
The next segment of intensifying opposition involves Jesus going to Jerusalem in 20:17-34. Jesus made it clear that he was going to Jerusalem to suffer and die. He only faced opposition from the mother of two disciples who sought authority for her sons in the kingdom. Then, Jesus was welcomed by the crowds into Jerusalem as he fulfilled Old Testament prophecy in his triumphal entry. 
In the next segment, in 21:12–22:46, Jesus faced opposition as he moved in and out of Jerusalem and the temple. He drove out money changers, told parables that warned about God’s coming judgment. Moreover, Jesus and the religious leaders disputed theologically over taxes to Caesar, the resurrection of the dead, the greatest commandment and the question of whose son the Messiah was. 
But Jesus dealt with his opponents so well that we read these words in Matthew 22:46: 

No one could say a word in reply, and from that day on no one dared to ask him any more questions (Matthew 22:46).

Having surveyed Matthew’s narrative on the intensifying opposition to the kingdom of heaven, we should now look at the discourse that accompanies it.


#### Future Victory 

This section extends from Matthew 23:1–25:46. In this discourse, Jesus described the future victory of the kingdom of heaven. 
This section begins with announcements of seven woes against Jesus’ opponents in Matthew 23:1-38. This discourse focuses especially on the Pharisees, their false teachings, their abuse of God’s people, and their hypocrisies. 
Near the end of this discourse, Jesus summed up his feelings about Jerusalem in this way in Matthew 23:37-38:

> O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, you who kill the prophets and stone those sent to you, how often I have longed to gather your children together, as a hen gathers her chicks under her wings, but you were not willing. Look your house is left to you desolate (Matthew 23:37-38).

The next section of Jesus’ discourse is often called the Olivet Discourse and it appears in Matthew 24:1–25:46. It’s often called the Olivet Discourse, because Jesus spoke these words to his disciples on the Mount of Olives.
	The Olivet Discourse can be divided into three primary sections: In 24:4-28, Jesus described the birth pangs of this strange age in which the kingdom of heaven had come to earth but had not yet been manifested in the fullness of its glory and power. In 24:29-31, he spoke of the fullness of the kingdom, foretelling the day when the Son of Man would come on the clouds, and the kingdom of heaven would arrive in all of its power and glory. Then in 24:32–25:46, Jesus exhorted his people to watch carefully for the coming day of glory because no one knows when it will be.

> Well, as far as when Jesus is going to return, he was very intentional to make sure that we didn’t try to pinpoint that in some point in time any more than we should. He said no one knows the day or the hour of his return. Even he in his human nature didn’t know the time of his return. So, for us to then speculate and think we can narrow it down is just disobeying Jesus. But that’s not to say we shouldn’t anticipate, look forward to, and even look for signs that his return is near. The main purpose of teaching on the second coming of Christ in the New Testament is primarily to sober us, to give us encouragement, to give us hope, to lead us to holy living, and expectant return of Christ. And so even though we don’t know the exact time, we should be ready, at any moment for him to return, so that we can greet him eagerly and joyfully. 
> 
> —	Dr. K. Erik Thoennes


> We should have full confidence that he will be returning. We should have full confidence that he is coming again, and he will culminate all that he has begun. We should also be faithful. We should not be sort of looking at, say, Acts 1 as Jesus departed, and they looked up into the sky and the angel says, “What are you looking up in the sky for? You should be about the business of taking the gospel to the nations.” He will come back, but we should be busy carrying out the Great Commission. We should be busy in the service of our King by taking to the nations the announcement that the King has come. He is coming again. Repent and believe the gospel. We should be discipling those who enter into that kingdom who profess faith in Jesus Christ, growing them up so they live to the glory of God, or conform to him. We should be living for God's glory in every aspect of our lives with our constant looking to his coming and saying with the church, in every age, “Come, Lord Jesus.”
> 
> —	Dr. Stephen J. Wellum

In this fifth major division of his gospel, Matthew reported that the Jewish leaders rejected Jesus, and even planned to kill him. But Jesus made it clear that all the planning in the world couldn’t stop the future triumph of the kingdom. And history proves that he was right. The Jewish leaders did kill him. But his kingdom has continued to grow throughout the ages. And one day, history will prove the last part right, too. Jesus will come again, with power and great glory, to bring his kingdom in all its fullness, and to reward his faithful people with the kingdom’s ultimate blessings.
