### CULMINATION OF JESUS’ MINISTRY

The narrative conclusion to Matthew’s gospel runs from Matthew 26:1–28:20. Here, Matthew describes the culmination of Jesus’ ministry as the messianic King in his arrest, crucifixion, and resurrection. 
 As we explore the conclusion to Matthew’s gospel, we’ll focus on three themes that involve Matthew’s kingdom focus: the themes of conflict, discipleship, and victory. Let’s turn first to the theme of conflict.	 

#### Conflict

The kingdom that Jesus actually brought was very different from the kingdom that the Jews expected the Messiah to bring, and this brought them into direct conflict with Jesus and his kingdom. As we have seen, this conflict intensifies throughout Matthew’s gospel, but it culminates in the narrative conclusion. For example, we see it in the Jews’ plot against Jesus in 26:3-4; in their engineering of his arrest and trial in 26:14-16, verse 47, and verses 57-68; and in their crying out for his crucifixion in 27:20-25. And it comes to a head when the Jews themselves accept responsibility for Jesus’ crucifixion. Listen to Matthew’s report in Matthew 27:25:

> All the people answered, “Let his blood be on us and on our children!” (Matthew 27:25).

Then while Jesus suffered on the cross, the Jews mocked him, ridiculing his claim to be the messianic King of Israel. As we read in Matthew 27:41-42:

> The chief priests, the teachers of the law and the elders mocked him. “He saved others,” they said, “but he can’t save himself! He’s the king of Israel!” (Matthew 27:41-42).

Ironically, the Jews opposed Jesus on the grounds that he was an offense to God and an imposter to the throne, while in reality they were rejecting the only king that had the power to save them.
Besides the theme of conflict, the theme of discipleship also highlights the kingdom emphasis of Matthew’s conclusion.


#### Discipleship

In particular, Matthew emphasized how difficult it was to follow a suffering Messiah. He stressed this by reporting the failures of Jesus’ disciples at this crucial moment of Jesus’ ministry. Judas betrayed him in Matthew 26:14-16 and verses 47-50, and he committed suicide over this failure in 27:3-10. Peter, James, and John failed to keep watch with him in Gethsemane in 26:36-46. And Peter repeatedly denied that he even knew Jesus in 26:69-75. Finally, all of Jesus’ disciples deserted him in 26:56. 
	The fact is that following Jesus can be very difficult. We believe in a messianic King that suffered, and who has called us to suffer as well. If we are faithful to him, the likelihood is that we will experience hardship and suffering, too, and that we will be tempted to fall away. The kingdom of heaven has not yet come in all of its fullness. And because of this, there are many aspects of the Christian life that are not yet as they should be.
	Having considered the themes of conflict and discipleship, we are ready to turn to the theme of the victory of the kingdom.


#### Victory

The theme of victory appears clearly in Jesus’ resurrection, which was the proof that the messianic King had conquered all of the enemies of his people, even death itself. And we also see the theme of victory in Jesus’ last words before his ascension. Jesus’ final words recorded in Matthew’s gospel are found in Matthew 28:18-20, and they are usually called the Great Commission. They are the Lord’s final instructions to his disciples, commissioning them to ministry in his absence. And it is noteworthy that these instructions begin with Christ boldly claiming all kingdom authority. Listen to Jesus’ proclamation in Matthew 28:18.

> All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me (Mathew 28:18).


> Jesus is the only one who can claim all dominion, all power, with legitimacy. And, by the way, his power is not destructive because it is power and love. Power motivated by love. Power moderated by love. See, if you have love alone, you have a nice sentiment, but maybe you are helpless because you don’t have power to change anything. If you have power alone without love you destroy, you kill, you hate. It’s the divine genius that brings love and power together. “God so loved the world that he sent his Son.” He is the only one that can legitimately claim all power because he is the only one that walked on this planet earth and never sinned, never lied, never deceived. He’s also the only one who, after he was killed, dead, buried, came back. So, he’s the risen Lord. It is the inauguration of a new era of human history. He’s bringing hope to the nations. And so, the kingdom of God is at work in very powerful ways, and that’s where world evangelization and discipling the nations then is based on this, what I call, “the great foundation.” You don’t have a great commission without the great foundation. And then he caps it with a great promise, “And I will be with you to the very end of the ages.” So, Jesus the Lord, Jesus the King, is the ruler who has all power, and so we go, we disciple, we teach, we proclaim his rule in his power. 
> 
> —	Dr. Peter Kuzmič

All authority belonged to the king who conquered. The Jews rejected him; the Romans crucified him; and they all mocked him. But the grave could not hold him, and the resurrection was the great victory of the messianic King. Through him, the kingdom of heaven had come to earth. And that is the good news of the Gospel According to Matthew.
Now that we’ve explored the background of the Gospel According to Matthew, as well as its structure and content, we’re ready to consider some major themes that Matthew emphasized.
