## MAJOR THEMES

In this section of our lesson, we’ll turn our attention to two prominent themes that Matthew emphasized throughout his gospel: the Old Testament heritage of Jesus’ kingdom and gospel, and the people of God for whom Jesus was bringing the kingdom. 
Let’s start with Matthew’s emphasis on the Old Testament heritage of Jesus’ kingdom and gospel.


### OLD TESTAMENT HERITAGE
	
> Matthew’s gospel is actually a fascinating account of how significant it is that the Old Testament anticipated the coming of Jesus Christ. Jesus comes onto the scene, and he is Israel incarnate. He goes down to Egypt. He is forced out into the wilderness where he’s tempted. He goes onto a mountain and he begins to deliver the Law again. All of these images of the new Moses, or Israel incarnate, find their source and their scope back in the Old Testament. Because when Israel was called, when Israel was elect by God, her election, that was never just a privilege to be enjoyed. It was a responsibility to be performed, to be a blessing to the nations. And yet, because of Israel’s long and rather dramatic history of sin, she could never be for herself or for the nations what she was called to be. So, here you have Jesus as the Son of God, as Israel incarnate, who shows up onto the scene, and he is for Israel what Israel couldn’t be for herself or for the nations. And I think it gives us a more textured, a deeper reading, on how the Old Testament anticipates Jesus, rather than finding him in a verse here or there. It’s the whole history of Israel. It’s the election of Israel. It’s the whole failure of Israel that anticipates the coming of Jesus, and Matthew picks up on that, especially in his first five or six chapters. 
> 
> —	Dr. Mark Gignilliat

Above all else, the story of the Bible is about God binding himself to his people with unbreakable cords of love. It’s the story of his faithfulness in keeping his promise to be with them in blessing. This is why Matthew told his generation of God’s people that they could still trust the ancient promises and that they could still believe that God was working in their own day in the person of Jesus. And it’s why Matthew felt so confident continually drawing on the Old Testament in order to support the claims and ministry of the messianic King, Jesus Christ
We’ll briefly survey five ways that Matthew demonstrates the Old Testament Heritage of Jesus’ kingdom and gospel: Matthew’s Old Testament quotations and allusions, his emphasis on the kingdom of heaven, his description of Jesus as the messianic King, Jesus’ conflict with unbelieving Jewish leaders, and Jesus’ humility and gentleness. Let’s begin with Matthew’s Old Testament quotations and allusions.


#### Quotations and Allusions

Matthew quoted the Old Testament far more often than any other gospel writer. Scholars debate the exact number of times Matthew quoted the Old Testament, but certainly he did so at least 40 times, and he alluded to it many other times.
	One strategy Matthew commonly used employed the phrase, “in order that it might be fulfilled.” Matthew used this phrase to make explicit connections between the Old Testament and events in Jesus’ life. 
For example, listen to what Matthew wrote in Matthew 8:17: 

> This was to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet Isaiah: “He took up our infirmities and carried our diseases” (Matthew 8:17).

Immediately before this Old Testament quotation, Matthew had reported many of Jesus’ healings. But he didn’t just want his readers to see Jesus as a healer. Rather, he wanted them to know that Jesus healed people in fulfillment of Old Testament promises. 

> What was important from Matthew’s point of view, and I would say should be from our point of view, is that in Jesus was the manifestation of the coming kingdom of God that people had been longing for, had been waiting for. So, they weren’t necessarily looking for a Messiah to fulfill a pinpoint prediction on a historical map, but they were longing for freedom, for release, for restoration, for salvation. And the Old Testament taught them that when the kingdom of God came, it would be announced by a particular person, the Messiah, and that at that announcement, God’s reign would begin, and all the restoration and salvation and the blessings that the Old Testament promised would begin to come into fruition. And so, the apostles in general, and Matthew in particular, didn’t simply sit with a chart on their lap waiting to see who fulfilled all of these predictions, but they saw a person in whose works and in whose teaching, and whose character, and everything about him, manifested the kingdom of God. In fact, the kingdom of God was in Jesus, not just announced by him, and he brought that kingdom. And so, out of that experience of the power and the teaching and the working of Jesus, the apostles — Matthew included — went back to their Old Testaments to see how Jesus had been anticipated by the Old Testament. And when they read their Old Testaments from the standpoint of experiencing Jesus, they found that the Old Testament Scriptures had, in fact, witnessed to him and him specifically. So, as we read the Old Testament, we don’t just read it with a jeweler’s magnifying glass on our eye, but we read it looking for an encounter with Christ himself, who is the chief subject of the Gospels as he comes as the witness and as the embodiment of the kingdom of God. 
> 
> —	Rev. Michael J. Glodo

The second way Matthew’s emphasis on Jesus’ Old Testament heritage can be seen is in his emphasis on the kingdom of heaven.


#### Kingdom of Heaven
	
In the Old Testament, God had promised that he would bless his people; and that his blessing would come through a royal Son of David. Matthew announced that God’s kingdom blessing in Jesus was the fulfillment of those ancient promises. 
	And in Matthew’s gospel, Jesus himself commonly reminds people of this fact. He regularly teaches that God is faithful to his Old Testament kingdom promises. This is how Jesus was able to present his kingdom as good news, even though it entailed suffering, and even though he didn’t do everything the Old Testament prophesies. Jesus insisted that his people trust God’s Word in the Old Testament enough to believe that Jesus would eventually return to finish everything he had started — that he would eventually return to fulfill everything that God had promised. 
In fact, this confidence in the Old Testament picture of the kingdom of heaven is the basis on which Jesus regularly called his followers to submit to and trust the Old Testament. It is the basis on which he instructed them to love and serve one another, as fellow citizens of God’s kingdom. 
The knowledge that the God of heaven and earth is in control of all history and is faithful to his promises should motivate his people in every age — including ours — to trust that his promises in Christ are still good. They should inspire us to believe that one day God really will make everything new and right. And they should give us strength and endurance as we wait patiently for God to bring his kingdom in all its fullness. 
A third way Matthew emphasized the Old Testament heritage of Jesus’ kingdom and gospel was by insisting that Jesus was the expected messianic King.

