#### Messianic King

We mentioned this idea earlier in this lesson when we discussed the genealogy of Jesus. It’s also seen in the fact that Matthew called Jesus “Son of David” more frequently than all the other gospel writers combined. Matthew also used many other royal titles for Jesus, including King of the Jews, King of Israel, your King, and simply King. Moreover, some of the verses in which Matthew uses royal titles for Jesus don’t appear in any other gospel. For example, in Matthew 2:2, Matthew reported this question from the wise men:

Where is the one who has been born king of the Jews? (Matthew 2:2).

No other gospel includes this verse, or this great an emphasis on Jesus’ messianic kingship.
The fourth emphasis on the Old Testament heritage of Jesus’ kingdom and gospel that we will mention is Jesus’ conflict with unbelieving Jewish leaders.


#### Unbelieving Jewish Leaders
	
 Matthew’s early readers might have been tempted to think that Jesus’ conflict with many of the leaders in Israel proved that Jesus wasn’t the messiah. To make sure they didn’t get this impression, Matthew made it clear that God was keeping his promises through Jesus despite the faithlessness of the Jewish leaders. 
Time after time, Jesus rejected the teachings of the Pharisees and the teachers of the Law. He corrected their views on fasting in Matthew 9:14-17, on the Sabbath in 12:1 13, and on hand washing in 15:1-20. And most of the Sermon on the Mount — especially 5:17-48 — contrasts the Jewish view of the law of God with Jesus’ fulfillment of that law.

> Well, sometimes people have wondered when Jesus said the words, “You have heard it was said, but I say to you…” in the Sermon on the Mount, to be Jesus actually contradicting what was said in the Old Testament. But I think what’s the most obvious way of reading that is that Jesus was refuting some of the ways in which the Old Testament Law — that God did say — had been interpreted by various scribes and teachers down the ages. And what Jesus is doing is setting himself up as the one who is rightly able to interpret God’s law and to take what was written in God’s law and apply it to his hearers in that day. 
> 
> —	Rev. Dr. Simon Vibert


> When Jesus speaks in the Sermon on the Mount using this phrase, “You have heard it said but I say to you…” he was not saying that the Old Testament Law is now being nullified. In fact, he says quite the opposite very explicitly, that “I have come to fulfill the Law.” But what Jesus is doing is he is using a well-known rabbinic technique that teachers of the Law would use to talk about their own teaching authority. “You’ve heard different people in the tradition say these things about the teachings of the Law, but I say to you…” And that comes with a present authority, with an additional authority. And so, Jesus is establishing his teaching authority with this well-known teaching technique. Not to discount the Old Testament Law, but to say something very important theologically and Christologically, that “it’s important to interpret the Old Testament Law in relation to me and to my teaching of the Law.” 
> 
> —	Dr. Gregory R. Perry


> No, Jesus was not contradicting the Old Testament. But one of the themes we see in the Gospel of Matthew is that Jesus is the new Moses, and that he is superior to Moses. So, we have the Old Testament revelation given through Moses, which is the authoritative word of God, but Jesus stands as the sovereign interpreter of the Law. So much of what we see in the Sermon on the Mount represents an accurate interpretation of what Moses meant. So, Jesus has not abolished the command, “Do not murder.” He simply explains to us that murder begins in the heart with anger. Remember how that section begins? Jesus says, “I did not come to abolish the Law but to fulfill it,” which I think means to rightly interpret the Law. But I think what Jesus is arguing there is, he actually fulfills the true intention of the Law. The Law must be interpreted in light of Jesus Christ’s coming and his death and resurrection and his ministry. But when we understand him in that way, Jesus does not abolish the Old Testament Law, but he fulfills it. 
> 
> —	Dr. Thomas R. Schreiner

Jesus really did fulfill the Old Testament’s messianic expectations. But many Jews rejected him because their own expectations were not fully in line with the Old Testament. And their misunderstandings are a caution to everyone who tries to follow Jesus. They warn us that it’s easy to let our own ideas of what God’s work looks like cloud our vision. They warn us not to place artificial limits on what God can do, but to let him define our hopes and expectations.
The fifth way Matthew’s emphasis on Jesus’ Old Testament heritage is evident is in his description of Jesus’ humility and gentleness.


#### Humility and Gentleness
	
 The Jews of Jesus’ day correctly understood that, according to the Old Testament, God would send his mighty warrior to deliver his people. But Matthew stressed that the mighty deliverance of God was rooted in his gentle compassion for his people. And he made this point by drawing on the Old Testament. 
	For instance, in Matthew 11:29, Jesus invited the heavily burdened with these words:

> Take my yoke upon you and learn from me, for I am gentle and humble in heart, and you will find rest for your souls (Matthew 11:29).

Here, Jesus quoted Jeremiah 6:16 to prove that the Messiah would provide rest for his people. Similarly, in Matthew 12:15-21, Matthew reported Jesus’ compassionate healing ministry, and quoted Isaiah 42:1-4 to explain what Jesus was doing. Listen to the description of Jesus in Matthew 12:19-20:

> He will not quarrel or cry out; no one will hear his voice in the streets. A bruised reed he will not break, and a smoldering wick he will not snuff out (Matthew 12:19-20).

Jesus was not the harsh militaristic king many Jews were looking for to lead them in battle against Rome. Instead, he was gentle and compassionate. In keeping with the Old Testament, Matthew portrayed Jesus as the conquering King and the authoritative teacher of God’s people. At the same time, Matthew stressed that Jesus was the humble, compassionate King. The call to follow Jesus in our own lives and ministries challenges us to speak the truth with the same kind of compassion that Jesus modeled. 
Matthew stressed the Old Testament heritage of Jesus’ kingdom and gospel in many different ways. At the same time, he made it clear that Jesus fulfilled all the ancient expectations in a way that transcended average expectations. But the good news — the gospel — was that he did fulfill them. The kingdom, the Law, and especially the King himself were all fulfilled as Jesus brought the kingdom of heaven to earth. 
Having looked at the Old Testament heritage of Jesus’ kingdom and gospel, we’re ready to consider the theme of the people of God.
