### PEOPLE OF GOD
	
In the Gospel of Matthew, just as in the rest of the Bible, the people of God are the ones that belong to God, the ones that he keeps as a prized possession, and the special nation that he rules over as king. And they are not just in relationship directly with God; they are also in a close relationship with everyone else that belongs to him.
We’ll explore the theme of the people of God in three parts. First, we’ll see that Matthew identifies the people of God as the church. Second, we’ll see that he also calls them the “family of God.” And third, we’ll consider the calling the people of God have received from Jesus. Let’s begin with the idea that the church is the people of God.


#### Church

In the Old Testament, Israel was God’s people. But in the New Testament, God’s people are most commonly called “the church.” Our modern term for “church” translates the Greek word ekklesia in Matthew. In the Septuagint, the Greek translation of the Old Testament, ekklesia is a translation of the Hebrew word qahal, which the Hebrew Old Testament typically used to refer to the assembly or congregation of the people of Israel. This shift in vocabulary — from the “assembly” of Israel to the Christian “church” — demonstrates that both Jesus and Matthew saw the Christian church as the continuation of the assembly of Israel. 
	Consider the use of the Hebrew word qahal, or “assembly,” in the Old Testament. The people of Israel are identified as the “assembly” in Leviticus 16:33; Numbers 16:47; Judges 20:2; and Psalm 22:22. In fact, the assembly of God’s people was so important in the Old Testament that it was one of the names the prophet Joel used to identify Israel when he foretold that God’s people would be restored in the last days. In Joel 2:16, he proclaimed:

> Gather the people, consecrate the assembly (Joel 2:16).

In the Hebrew original of this verse, the word translated “assembly” is qahal. But in the Greek translation of the Septuagint, the word is ekklesia — the word commonly translated “church” in the New Testament. Matthew used this same language when he reported these words from Jesus in Matthew 16:18:

> I will build my church (Matthew 16:18).

Here Jesus echoed Joel’s prophecy when he said that he would build his church, meaning his qahal or his messianic assembly of the last days. 

> Jesus does say in Matthew’s gospel that he will build his church. I think a good starting point is remembering that the word for church in the Greek New Testament, ekklesia, is really the Greek term used to convey the Old Testament idea of the assembly of God’s people, the qahal, so that the New Testament church is in continuity with the Old Testament assembly, the assembly of God’s people. 
> 
> —	Rev. Michael J. Glodo

We’ve already seen that the events of Matthew 16 took place at a time of growing resistance to Jesus’ claim to be the messianic King. And this resistance is one of the reasons Jesus encouraged his disciples with a reference to the assembly of Israel — he wanted them to have confidence in his plan to build his messianic assembly, or church.
	Jesus’ words also made it clear that the church belonged to him. It didn’t belong to Peter. It didn’t belong to Israel. It wasn’t a democratic institution owned by its members. It was the Messiah’s church — a point Matthew had already made in the introduction to his gospel when he reported the angel’s words to Joseph. Listen to Matthew’s record in 1:21:

> You are to give him the name Jesus, because he will save his people from their sins (Matthew 1:21).

In this verse, before Jesus was even born, the angel assured Joseph that the child in Mary’s womb was the Messiah to whom the entire people of God belonged. He was their king, and they were his people.

> And so we’re not just followers of Jesus individually, but we are the embodiment of this new creation that Jesus has brought in by his resurrection from the dead and by his giving of the Spirit to us as his new temple, so that we are the presence of the kingdom of God in the church where people can find mercy and forgiveness, and they can find provision when they lack, and they can find companionship when they are lonely. So, the church really is a foretaste of the new heavens and earth, which will one day be visible throughout the whole creation. 
> 
> —	Rev. Michael J. Glodo

When God’s people are under pressure, when the events of life threaten to drag them down, when the darkness hanging around them can almost be felt, Jesus says, “I will build my church. I will build my messianic assembly.” He assures us that he is our king, that he has our best interests in mind, and that he will certainly rescue and bless us in the end. It may not happen in this life. But it will happen. Of that we can be certain.
In addition to describing the people of God as the church, Matthew also identified them as the family of God.


#### Family of God

The Gospel of Matthew uses familial language like “father,” “son,” and “brother” over 150 times to describe the relationship of God’s people to himself and to each other. The only other gospel writer to use familial language so frequently was John. But when John used it, he was typically talking about the relationship between Jesus and his heavenly Father. 
In contrast, when Matthew used it he was talking about the relationship between God and his people — he was talking about the family of God. And primarily, Matthew used this vocabulary to emphasize the care and protection that God shows for his children. For example, in Matthew 6:4, Jesus spoke of God’s care for his people in this way: 

> Your Father, who sees what is done in secret, will reward you (Matthew 6:4).

And he used this same language again in verse 6, and yet again in verse 18. His point was that God was concerned with his children and intent on encouraging and providing for them.
	And when Jesus taught his disciples how to pray, he prefaced his instructions in Matthew 6:8 by telling them:

> Your Father knows what you need before you ask him (Matthew 6:8).

We can be confident that God will bless us, and that he will hear our prayers, because we know that he is our loving Father.

> My teaching area is spiritual formation, and one of the things I say about the Lord’s Prayer is that we start prayer by the recognition that at any given moment there could be millions of other people who are praying at the same time. One of the reasons we call God “God,” is that God can take each one of those prayers and can deal with them as if they were the only one that was vying for his attention in that moment. But that brings us into a holy fellowship, part of that kingdom of heaven personnel. Then right after that, of course, is the word “Father.” So that no matter who I am or where I am in that prayer, I’m moving toward God as Abba, moving toward God as Father. And if a person in Poland is calling God “Father” and I’m calling God “Father” in the United States, then that means we’re brothers and sisters. If we have the same father, then we’re members of the same family. So, I think Matthew gets at this in a powerful way with the concept of the kingdom of heaven, which he uses over and over again. But it’s the life of prayer that draws us into the realization that in the moment that I’m praying, I’m praying with other people who are saying the same thing that I am, but when they’re saying what I’m saying, it means we’re family. 
> 
> —	Dr. Steve Harper


> There is nothing more encouraging than to think about the fact that God has adopted us into his family. It’s a great thing to be forgiven, but as J. I. Packer says in his book Knowing God, it is also a great thing to be justified, but it is an even greater thing to be adopted into God’s family. To have God as our father, really, is the pinnacle of God’s work in our lives. We’re not just forgiven by the judge, we’re adopted into God’s family, and he’s our Father, and we’re his children. And, so then, we are co-heirs with Christ. Everything that’s coming to Jesus, which is all things, becomes ours. That’s our inheritance as well. There was a time when we were just children of wrath, when our inheritance was the wrath of God. And rather than wrath, we now are co-heirs with Christ. We are partakers of the divine nature and we are actually called brothers with Christ because we have sonship in him. We’ve traded in our filthy rags of unrighteousness for Christ’s righteousness. But in that we then become children of God, invited into his family. And that is the greatest blessing we could ever imagine. 
> 
> —	Dr. K. Erik Thoennes

In Matthew 6:25-34, Jesus used two different examples to assure God’s children of his care. He talked about the “birds of the air” and “the lilies of the field,” pointing out that God cares for the needs of the smallest members of his creation. And his point was that if God cares even for these small things, then he will certainly care far more for his people. Our heavenly Father will provide even better food, clothing and protection for us.
Jesus also emphasized God’s fatherly care and protection when he warned his disciples of the great difficulties of ministry. For instance, in 10:19-20, Jesus told them that they would be arrested. But he also told them that the Father’s Spirit would be with them. And he reminded them that when their lives were in danger because of their ministry, their Father would protect them. Listen to Jesus’ encouraging words in Matthew 10:29-31:

> Are not two sparrows sold for a penny? Yet not one of them will fall to the ground apart from the will of your Father... So don’t be afraid; you are worth more than many sparrows (Matthew 10:29-31).


> For many believers, life is very difficult being a Christian. Many parts of the world are under persecution. And the great joy of their life is that they are part of the body, and they can identify themselves as the people of God. The Scripture tells us that God is our Father. We have the tremendous privilege, as Romans 8 tells us, of being able to call upon God as Abba. We also have the fact that God is constantly caring for us. And we also see that God gives the members of his family a love. And so, for the believer, the heart of his life is this encouragement that comes through Christ because God is now our Father. 
> 
> —	Dr. Jeff Lowman

Having considered the people of God as both the church and the family of God, we are ready to consider the calling of the people of God.
