## CONCLUSION

In this study of the Gospel According to Matthew, we have explored its background in terms of its authorship, original audience and occasion; we have surveyed its structure and content, and we have considered the major themes of its Old Testament heritage and its emphasis on the people of God. 
	Matthew’s gospel proclaims the good news that the Old Testament promises of the kingdom of heaven have been fulfilled in the person and work of Jesus the messianic King. And the good news is that Jesus established and continues to build his kingdom for us and through us. But this good news is not always easy. As we have seen, Matthew described our calling to follow the suffering messianic King in radical terms. But he also described the blessings of the heavenly Father in radical terms — blessings that enable us to follow our King faithfully, and to persevere through our own suffering, until the kingdom of heaven comes to earth in its full glory.

 
## CONTRIBUTORS

Dr. Pete Alwinson (Host) is the Executive Director of FORGE: City Wide Ministry to Men with Man in the Mirror. He is also the founding pastor of Willow Creek Presbyterian Church (PCA) in Winter Springs, FL, where he served as Senior Pastor for 26 years. Dr. Alwinson received his M.Div. from Trinity Evangelical Divinity School and his D.Min. from Reformed Theological Seminary. He is an Adjunct Professor at Reformed Theological Seminary, a Board Member of Key Life Network, and the author of Like Father, Like Son: How Knowing God as Father Changes Men. 


Dr. David R. Bauer is Dean of the School of Biblical Interpretation and the Ralph Waldo Beeson Professor of Inductive Biblical Studies at Asbury Theological Seminary.

Dr. Stephen Chan is Associate Professor of Theology and Religious Studies at Seattle University.

Dr. Steven Cowan is Professor of Philosophy and Religion at Lincoln Memorial University and is on staff with the Apologetics Resource Center, having served previously as Associate Professor of Philosophy and Apologetics at Birmingham Theological Seminary.

Dr. Mark Gignilliat is Associate Professor of Divinity in Old Testament at Beeson Divinity School.

Rev. Michael J. Glodo is Associate Professor of Pastoral Theology at Reformed Theological Seminary in Orlando, Florida.

Dr. James M. Hamilton is Associate Professor of Biblical Theology at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary and Preaching Pastor of Kenwood Baptist Church.

Dr. Steve Harper is the founding Vice President of the Florida-Dunnam campus of Asbury Theological Seminary in Orlando, FL, and retired Professor of Spiritual Formation and Wesley Studies.

Dr. Peter Kuzmič is the Eva B. and Paul E. Toms Distinguished Professor of World Missions and European Studies at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary and the co-founder and director of Evangelical Theological Seminary in Osijek, Croatia.

Dr. Jeff Lowman is Senior Pastor at Evangel Church PCA in Alabaster, Alabama and Professor of Homiletics and Systematic Theology at Birmingham Theological Seminary.

Dr. Jim Maples is Director of the Doctor of Ministry in Pastoral Leadership program at Birmingham Theological Seminary.

Dr. John E. McKinley is Associate Professor of Biblical and Theological Studies at Talbot School of Theology.

Dr. R. Albert Mohler, Jr. is President of The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.

Dr. Jonathan T. Pennington is Associate Professor of New Testament Interpretation and the Director of Research Doctoral Studies at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.

Dr. Gregory R. Perry is Vice President for Strategic Projects at Third Millennium Ministries and President of Thirdmill Seminary. He served previously as Associate Professor of New Testament and the Director of City Ministry Initiative at Covenant Theological Seminary.

Dr. Thomas R. Schreiner is the James Buchanan Harrison Professor of New Testament Interpretation and Associate Dean of Scripture and Interpretation at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.

Dr. Mark L. Strauss is Professor of New Testament at Bethel Seminary, San Diego.

Dr. K. Erik Thoennes is Professor of Biblical and Theological Studies at Biola University’s Talbot School of Theology and is Chair of the Biblical and Theological Studies Theology Department.

Rev. Dr. Simon Vibert is Vicar of Christ Church Virginia Water in Surrey, England, and the former Vice Principal and Director of the School of Preaching at Wycliffe Hall, Oxford.

Dr. Peter Walker has served as Professor of Biblical Studies at Trinity School for Ministry and as Associate Vice-Principal at Wycliffe Hall, Oxford. He is currently an instructor with Jerusalem Center for Biblical Studies.

Dr. Willie Wells, Jr. is Pastor at Pleasant Grove Baptist Church in Fairfield, Alabama and a professor at Birmingham Theological Seminary.

Dr. Stephen J. Wellum is Professor of Christian Theology at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.

Dr. Ben Witherington III is Amos Professor of New Testament for Doctoral Studies at Asbury Theological Seminary.
 
## GLOSSARY
 
 
Beelzebub – Also known as Beelzebul; “the prince of demons”; another name for Satan 

ecclesia/ekklesia – Greek term (transliteration) for "assembly," "people of God," "church"

Eusebius – (A.D. 263-340) Early Christian historian who wrote Ecclesiastical History 

Ignatius – (ca. A.D. 50-108) Church father and third Bishop of Antioch who wrote a series of letters to early Christians addressing a number of important theological topics

Irenaeus – (ca. A.D. 130-202) Second-century bishop and early Christian writer who wrote Against Heresies in which he refuted Gnosticism and affirmed the validity of the four gospels 

Joseph (the carpenter) – Husband of Mary (the mother of Jesus) and a descendant of King David

kingdom of heaven – Phrase used only by Matthew to refer to the kingdom of God

Levi – The apostle Matthew's other name; tax collector who became an apostle; also, a tribe of Israel that served as priests

Messiah – Hebrew word meaning "anointed one"; the great King from David’s royal line who would bring about the transition from this age to the age to come; translated "Christos" in Greek

Papias – (ca. A.D. 70-163) Early Christian writer and Bishop of Hierapolis; quoted by Eusebius in regard to who wrote the Gospels
parable – A short allegorical story used to teach a moral or spiritual lesson

Pharisees – Jewish religious sect from the first century known for their strict observance of the Law; believed in the future resurrection, but also believed that God would not intervene until Israel became obedient to the Law 

qahal – Hebrew term (transliteration) meaning "assembly" or "congregation"

Sadducees – Jewish sect at the time of Christ that only adhered to the five books written by Moses (Genesis–Deuteronomy) and did not believe in angels, spirits, or the resurrection of the dead

Son of David – Messianic title that referred to David’s long-awaited, righteous descendant who would save God’s people; frequently applied to Jesus in the New Testament (especially in Matthew)

synoptic – Term meaning "seen together"; used when referring to the gospels of Matthew, Mark and Luke because of their similarities

Syrian Antioch – City in Syria from which Paul and Barnabas were sent on their first missionary journey

Tertullian – (ca. A.D. 155-230) Early Christian writer and church father from Carthage who wrote Against Marcion and popularized the Latin terminology used to discuss the Trinity
 

