# Study Guide 
# Biblical Foundations
# Module One – Introduction to the Gospels

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for this course’s final exam.

**********************************

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 – 34:18

Introduction

I. Literary Character

      A. Genre

  	1. Historical Narrative

  	2. Greco-Roman Biography

  	3. Biblical Historical Narrative

      B. Reliability

1. Access

  	2. Candor

  	3. Corroboration

  	4. Training

  	5. Theological Convictions

 	6. Holy Spirit


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. What is the literary genre of the gospels, according to the lesson? 

2. What is the teaching of the lesson regarding the chronological order found in the gospels? 

3. Why does the lesson quote Plutarch, a secular Greek historian from the first century? What does it show?

4. What was the intended audience of the gospels? 

5. What was the prominent cultural orientation of the authors of the gospels? 

6. Describe the access that each gospel author had to the facts about the life of Jesus.

7. What does the lesson say about the fact that the gospels candidly reveal the weaknesses and failures of the disciples? What does it show?

8. Were there any Greco-Roman writers from the first century that mention Jesus Christ?

9. What is the name of the Jewish historian from the first century who mentions Jesus?

10. Does the Jewish Talmud mention Jesus?

11. Mention the evidence given in the lesson of the reliability of the gospels. 
