## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 34:18 – 52:49

II. Status in the Church

      A. Composition

 	1. Similarities

  	2. Theories of Composition

  	3. Certainty

      B. Authenticity

  	1. Trustworthy Authors

  	2. Apostolic Approval

  	3. Witness of the Church 


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. What does the word "synoptic" mean?

2. Which of the gospels are considered "synoptic" gospels? 

3. In general, what are the similarities and differences of the synoptic gospels? 

4. Describe the unique way each gospel has of relating the stories and teachings of Jesus.

5. In general, how is Gospel of John different from the synoptic gospels in terms of the events that it includes? 

6. Mention some key events that are included in all four gospels.

7. What theory of the composition of the four gospels is accepted by the majority of scholars? 

8. By the end of the second century, had the Church agreed about all of the documents that should be included in the New Testament? 

9. What do the early writings tell us about whether the four gospels were always considered by the Church as genuine documents to be included in the New Testament?

10. Eusebius wrote, "The four Gospels...are the only _________ ones in the Church of God under heaven."

11. Eusebius wrote that an important person approved the synoptic gospels. Who was that important person?

 
## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 52:49 – 1:10:18

III. Unity

      A. Same story

      B. Jesus 

  	1. Proofs 

  	2. Vocabulary

  	3. Stages 


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. What is the literal meaning of the Greek word for "gospel" (euangelion)? 

2. How was the word "gospel" often used in ancient times?

3. Which are used more frequently in the gospels, terms related to the concept of kingdom or terms like "gospel" and "evangelize"?

4. Mention the proofs given in the lesson that Jesus was the true king. 

5. What is the meaning of the Greek word "Christos" (here transliterated)?

6. What is the meaning of the Greek word "Kurios" (here transliterated)? 

7. What is the difference between the way most Jewish theologians during the time of the Old Testament understood the coming of the kingdom and the teaching of Jesus regarding the coming of the kingdom? 

8. What does the lesson mean by "elongation of eschatology"? 

 
:
## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 1:10:18 – 1:48:23

IV. Variety

      A. Apparent Difficulties

  	1. Chronology

  	2. Omission

  	3. Different Events

  	4. Different Speeches

      B. Distinctive Emphases

  	1. Matthew

  	2. Mark

  	3. Luke

 	4. John

Conclusion


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. How does the lesson describe the chronology of the four gospels in general? 

2. According to the lesson, why does John not include the narration of the Lord's Supper? 

3. What suggestion does the lesson give in order to reconcile the apparent differences in the account of Jesus being anointed, where one gospels says it happened in the house of a Pharisee (Luke 7), and another gospel says it happened in the house of Simon the leper (Mark 14)? 

4. According to Matthew in chapter 5, Jesus preached a sermon on the "mountainside," but Luke (chapter 6) apparently gives an account of the same sermon, saying that He preached it on a "level place." What are some possible explanations of this difference, according to the lesson? 

5. How does the lesson explain the differences in the four gospels in general? 

6. How does each gospel answer the question with its unique emphasis, "Who is Jesus?" 

7. How does each gospel answer the question with its unique emphasis, "How do we follow Jesus?" 
