# New Testament Foundations – Module 7 – The Structure and Content of Acts
## Discussion Questions

1.	What did you like in the lesson or was the most significant thing you learned? What questions did you have?


2.	Why is it important to understand Luke’s purposes in writing Acts? What can we learn from his example? How does it help us interpret Acts correctly?


3.	Why is it important to believe that Acts records real history? How would it affect you if you believed that it was not real history?


4.	What is the relationship between the church and God’s kingdom on earth?


5.	Give an example of something that God clearly approves of or something God clearly disapproves in the narratives of the Book of Acts.  What can we learn from this example?


6.	What kinds of growth should we expect from our own congregation? How can we achieve these kinds of growth?


7.	What encouragement can be found in conflict?


8.	How have you seen growth in your life through maturity coupled with tension or growth inside coupled with opposition from the outside.


9.	Give an example of an inappropriate application that you may have been thinking previously from your reading of Acts, because you were not taking into account the special time and circumstances or the original context.  What have you learned in this lesson to help you avoid mistaken applications.


10.	How do our circumstances resemble the circumstances of Acts? How are they different? Why should the modern church consider these similarities and differences when applying Acts to our modern lives?




REVIEW STATEMENT: Kingdom advance from church growth comes through various interactions: 1) between internal/qualitative growth and tension, 2) between external/quantitative growth and opposition, and 3) between internal growth/tension and external growth/opposition. This is illustrated in Figure 1: 
 
Figure 1. Dynamics of Church Growth and Kingdom Advance
CASE STUDY: First Bible Church was known as a group that was zealous for the truth of Scripture. They had a membership of about 60 people who were quite close and who loved to have Bible Studies together. They saw themselves as a very healthy church: zealous for the truth, always learning more about the Bible, good fellowship among themselves, and no opposition from unbelievers. They hadn’t had any adult baptisms in a long time, but they consoled themselves in that they were being faithful and growing spiritually. Once in a while they would grow in membership when someone from their denomination moved into their area. But that was counteracted by people moving away or dying. Most visitors who came from the neighborhood didn’t end up staying. When interviewed later, most of neighbors said it was a very academic environment and that the members looked down on people who weren’t very academically-oriented. 

## REFLECTION QUESTIONS:

1.	What do you think about this statement that is based on the Review Statement above: “Churches that have no internal tension and external opposition probably aren’t healthy or growing”? Does it seem strange? Have you experienced this?
2.	How would you evaluate the health of the First Bible Church in the Case Study above?
3.	How would you evaluate the health of your church, and why?
4.	God is a God of adventure and he has placed us as kingdom agents within the greatest adventure of all time—the coming of his kingdom. Think of adventure stories and movies you know about. Does the protagonist usually have an easy time of it? Would you be interested in watching the movie or reading the book if the protagonist experienced no internal tension or external opposition? Explain your answer. 
5.	In what ways have you experienced adventure as a kingdom agent of the King? How have you responded to it? How has it affected your life?
6.	In God’s plan, we his people are now in an adventure. Glory comes late—in the new heavens and earth. To what extent have you embraced the adventure nature of being a kingdom agent? To what extent are you grasping after glory now instead of engaging in the adventure? Give examples.

## Action Assignments:
1.	Talk to your pastor or church leader about the dynamics of church growth and kingdom advance illustrated above. Ask him how he sees those dynamics working out in your church. Ask him how you can be better involved in church as a kingdom agent. 
2.	This week keep track in writing of the times you are feeling the adventure of being a kingdom agent is too much to bear. Write down 1) what happened to make you feel that way, 2) how you responded, 3) reasons why you should respond in a biblical way. Ask the Lord for strength to engage faithfully and unwaveringly in the adventure where he has placed you. 

