## Positive Affirmations

There are countless passages in the Gospels that clearly demonstrate Christ’s positive outlook on the full authority and relevance of Old Testament Scriptures. He frequently referred to the Old Testament as the basis of his own teachings. And we mustn’t forget the scene on the Mount of Transfiguration where Jesus stood between Moses the lawgiver and Elijah the prophet. All four gospels stress Jesus’ perfect righteousness — his complete submission to the law and the prophets. Jesus lived in submission to the teaching of the Old Testament. He came to fulfill them all and he called his disciples to do the same.

Listen to what Jesus said in Matthew 5:17-18:

> Do not think that I have come to abolish the Law or the Prophets; I have not come to abolish them but to fulfill them. For truly, I say to you, until heaven and earth pass away, not an iota, not a dot, will pass from the Law until all is accomplished (Matthew 5:17-18).

Here Jesus insisted that he did not come to do away with “the Law or the Prophets” — a common way to refer to the entire Old Testament in the first century. In fact, we can translate the opening of verse 17, not simply as “Do not think” but as, “Do not [even begin to] think …” So, when Jesus went on to say that even the smallest letter or stroke of the Law will remain in force “until all is accomplished,” he fully affirmed the Old Testament Scriptures. Unfortunately, many Christians read these verses and think that Jesus meant something like, “I have not come to get rid of the Old Testament but to render it irrelevant.” But this was hardly the case. Listen to the words Jesus spoke next in Matthew 5:19:

> Whoever relaxes one of the least of these commandments and teaches others to do the same will be called least in the kingdom of heaven, but whoever does them and teaches them will be called great in the kingdom of heaven (Matthew 5:19).

Notice what Jesus said in this passage. If people fail to keep, or if they encourage others to ignore, even the least of the commandments, they will be “least in the kingdom of heaven.” And whoever keeps, and teaches others to keep, even the least of the commandments will be “great in the kingdom of heaven.”

Jesus knew something about the Jews in his day that’s true of believers today as well. We all tend to be very selective in applying the Old Testament to our lives. We tend to pay attention to those parts that we like and ignore, or even reject, those parts that we don’t like. But Jesus insisted that his disciples should affirm and follow every detail of the entire Old Testament, not just some parts of it.

Listen to the way he put it in Matthew 5:20:

> I tell you, unless your righteousness exceeds that of the scribes and Pharisees, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven (Matthew 5:20).

Followers of Christ must not fall into the hypocrisy of claiming to believe that the Old Testament is the Word of God, but failing to obey it.

> With regard to the Old Testament, Jesus himself in Luke 24, the risen Jesus, takes the disciples there on the Emmaus road back through a Bible study of the Old Testament, and he shows them in all the Scriptures the things concerning himself. Now, that must mean that Jesus saw the Old Testament as important, as pointing to him. And it’s almost as if he’s saying, “Look, you may have the resurrection, my resurrection, and that’s marvelous, but don’t think because you’ve now got me, you don’t need the text, you don’t need the background book. On the contrary, you need it all the more to understand me and to understand God’s purposes for the world.” So, we see Jesus affirming the Old Testament then, and in many other instances. I mean, when he’s tempted, he just keeps repeating, “It is written… It is written… It is written…” This is the Master showing us that if he was submitted to Scripture, how much more do we his followers need to be. — Dr. Peter Walker

Now that we’ve seen how the teachings of Jesus affirmed the Old Testament’s relevance for us today, we should turn briefly to another portion of the New Testament, the teachings of the apostle Paul.
