## Ancient World

One of our principal tasks is to interpret the Old Testament as much as we can in terms of the ancient world to which it was first given. But, even if we work hard at this, we will never do it perfectly. We’re so deeply influenced by the world in which we live today that we’ll always come to the ancient texts of Scripture with modern predispositions that we can’t fully escape. Unfortunately, this fact is often taken as a justification for simply reading what we believe as modern people into the Old Testament. But to do this makes the Scriptures subject to us, rather than us subject to the Scriptures. So, while we can’t fully escape our modern biases, all faithful students should study Old Testament passages diligently to understand their original meaning as much as possible.

Put simply, the original meaning of an Old Testament passage is the impact that God and his inspired writers designed the text to have on its first audience. In a very important sense, we’re not hearing God and his inspired writers speaking directly to us; we’re overhearing them speaking to others. So, as we study the Old Testament, it’s crucial to ask questions like: What were the priorities of the first audience? What did they believe? What were their situations? How did God call them to submit to him in their day? Answering these kinds of questions isn’t always easy. But pursuing original meaning sets the course for all modern application.

Once we give adequate attention to the ancient world of the Old Testament, we need to face the challenge of dealing with the historical developments that have taken place between Old Testament times and our day.

## Historical Developments

Unlike the holy books of some other religions, the theological teachings of the Old Testament developed over time. The Old Testament refers to the many ways God revealed truths about himself, the world and people beginning in primeval times. It then continues with God’s revelations in the days of Israel’s patriarchs, in the days of Moses, and during the time when Israel entered the Promised Land. But it doesn’t stop there. We also see God’s revelations in the era of Israel’s monarchy, during the tragedy of Israel’s exile from the Promised Land, and finally in the times of struggle that occurred after some Israelites returned to the Promised Land. It was not as if God revealed something to his people once and never said anything related to that theme or topic again. On the contrary, within the Old Testament itself, God continued to reveal more and more.

Beyond this, very significant developments in biblical faith also appear in the teachings of the New Testament. The New Testament acknowledges the authority of the Old Testament, but it also reveals further developments in New Testament times. So, every time we apply a passage of the Old Testament to our lives today, we must move beyond its original meaning and consider the manifold historical developments that took place between the ancient Old Testament world and our modern world.

Biblical faith didn’t remain the same through the centuries, but it was not as if God started one religion, discarded it, and then replaced it with another. The Bible represents one growing religion or faith. Theologians often describe the developments of biblical faith as organic — it grew much like a tree grows from a seed to full maturity. When you think about it, a seed looks very different from the mature tree that grows from it. At every stage of growth, there are differences. But it remains one organism, one plant. In much the same way, later portions of the Old Testament are different from earlier portions. And the New Testament is different from the Old Testament. But these differences reflect organic growth. Our faith grew from one seed planted long ago, matured throughout the Old Testament and reached maturity in the New Testament.

> There is a progress in how God reveals himself. The Bible shows this, what we call, “organic growth” where doctrines and themes and ideas about God grow from seed to full form, and so the Bible even talks about its own progressive message. And so, yes, there is a form of progression within the Bible and within the Pentateuch. It’s a movement from the beginnings of God’s revelation to the full flowering, if you will, if you can imagine a time lapse photo of a flower blossoming. — Rev. Michael J. Glodo

As we can see, to face the challenges of modern application, we must not only pay attention to the ancient world of the Old Testament and the historical developments that took place in the Scriptures themselves. We must also remain firmly committed to the fact that God inspired the Old Testament to be written with our world in mind.
