### Covenant.

In the third place, we’re the same kind of people because during Old Testament times, in the times between then and now, and even today, all people have been bound to God by covenant.

The Old and New Testaments consistently speak of all people as bound to God by covenant. As we’ll see in a later lesson, God’s covenants with Adam and Noah have been called “universal” covenants because they were made with all human beings. These covenants bring all people into obligation to God as their kind and benevolent King. The rest of the Old Testament focuses primarily on special covenants that God made with the nation of Israel, often called “national” covenants. The people of Israel were bound to God by his covenants with Abraham, Moses and David, and later, by the new covenant that Israel’s prophets predicted would come. And all of us are in the same condition today. Every person is bound to God by his covenants with Adam and Noah. And the church today is bound to God by his special covenants with the nation of Israel in the Old Testament and by the new covenant in Christ. You’ll recall that in Exodus 19:6, God spoke at Mount Sinai of his special covenant relationship with Israel in this way:

> You shall be to me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation (Exodus 19:6).

In 1 Peter 2:9 the apostle Peter quoted this passage, but he applied it to the New Testament church. As he put it:

> You are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for [God’s] own possession (1 Peter 2:9).

Here, Peter applied to the Christian church the words God spoke to his special covenant people Israel in the Old Testament. He did this because followers of Christ are now joined to God by the new covenant that is in Christ. This is an abiding line of connection that runs throughout history.

Now that we’ve explored the challenges we must overcome in our application of the Old Testament and examined our connections to the Old Testament, we should turn our attention to the developments that we must acknowledge if we’re going to apply the Old Testament to our day.
