	
# New Testament Foundations – Module Four – The Gospel of Luke
## Discussion Questions 

1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	How do we know that Luke wrote the Gospel of Luke and that his account is accurate?


3.	What was the purpose behind Luke writing to Gentile Christians like Theophilus?


4.	How was Jesus both fully divine and fully human?


5.	How did Luke describe salvation and the people in need of salvation?



6.	How should the purpose behind Luke’s gospel strengthen our faith?


7.	Why is it important to keep Luke’s original audience in mind as we read his gospel?


8.	How can quoting the Bible help us face temptation?


9.	What should we learn from the temple cleansing in Luke’s gospel?


10.	Why is it important to know that Jesus came to rescue his people from condemnation?


11.	How should we respond to Luke’s emphasis on socially disenfranchised groups, such as sinners and the poor?


12.	What theme from Luke especially draws your attention?  Explain why?


13.	What practical consequence does it have for your life to know that salvation reverses peoples’ conditions? How do you see that in your life?  In the lives of other Christians?


 
REVIEW STATEMENT on STRUCTURE AND CONTENT – JESUS’ BEGINNINGS: Luke’s main concern in 1:5-4:13 is to show that Jesus is the Son of God, the Son of David and the Messiah, and that through him God is fulfilling all his Old Testament promises. He is the second (and last) Adam, succeeding where Adam failed. He is the true Israel, succeeding where Israel failed. So the only way for anyone in the whole world to be faithful to God and inherit the kingdom blessings is to receive Jesus as King and Savior.

CASE STUDY: When I watch a good action/adventure movie, I often identify with the hero. I often imagine myself in that hero role. "Maybe I could do that and be a hero like him/her," I say to myself. The movie itself encourages us to see ourselves in the hero role. People probably wouldn't watch movies or read stories in books if they couldn't identify with the hero in some way. One of the reasons people often reject the story of the Bible and don't like to read it is this: We are not the main hero and could never be. It never encourages us to see ourselves in that hero role. Rather, we are initially on the side of the bad guy — the enemy of God. From another perspective, we, God's people, are the bride that needs rescuing. Or, from yet another perspective, we, God's people, are more like the sidekick or the helper. We can definitely be like the hero, and should even try to imitate him, but we can never be that main hero.
## Reflection Questions
1.	Have you found yourself identifying with the hero of a movie or book? If so, give some examples and explain how it makes you feel.
2.	If you are a believer you are part of the kingdom story of the Bible. How do you feel about being the bride in need of rescue and the sidekick who tries to be like the hero?
3.	How real is it to you — in practical ways — that, even though you interact with unbelievers, you live in a different dimension (that is, the kingdom of God) than they do (that is, the domain of darkness)? Give examples that will illustrate the level of reality you feel.
4.	Describe a time when you opted for a reward now instead of waiting for your reward in the next stage of the kingdom.
5.	How real is it to you — in practical ways — that your reward comes in the next stage of the kingdom of God, not in this one; and therefore that the meaning of your life cannot be evaluated adequately by criteria provided by your culture or your peers? Give evidence to support your answer.
## Action Assignment
•	Ask the Lord to increasingly put you in awe of him because of who he is and what he has done. Make this a regular prayer. This may involve you in some pain, but it will be worth it.
