# Kingdom, Covenants & Canon of the Old Testament

## Lesson Two

## The Kingdom of God

# INTRODUCTION

We have an expression in English to describe someone who becomes lost in details. We often say that such a person “can’t see the forest for the trees.” Now, lots of cultures have similar expressions, so it isn’t hard to understand what we mean. It’s easy to become lost in minutia to the point that we can’t see how all of the pieces fit together. So, in many complex and confusing situations like this, we often remind each other to step back and to look at the big picture.

We need to keep this advice in mind when we approach the Old Testament. The details of the Old Testament are so complex that it’s easy to become lost in its many names, places, events, theological teachings and moral instructions. And we lose sight of the underlying unity of the Old Testament. To overcome this problem, we need to step back and to get the big picture that ties all of the Old Testament together.

This is the second lesson in our series, Kingdom, Covenants & Canon of the Old Testament. We’ve entitled this lesson “The Kingdom of God.” God’s kingdom was fundamental to the faith of ancient Israel. So, a proper understanding of the kingdom provides one of the most comprehensive and unifying perspectives we can have on the Old Testament.

Everyone familiar with the Bible knows that the books of the Old Testament canon are very different from each other. They were written about different subjects in many genres and addressed the needs of God’s people in a variety of times and circumstances. Yet, the authors of these books always drew from basic outlooks that they held in common. All Old Testament authors believed that God established a series of major covenants with his people in different periods of history. They also believed that all of these covenants were designed to fulfill one main purpose — to administer God’s kingdom so that it would spread to the ends of the earth.

This lesson will touch on four dimensions of Israel’s unifying, foundational commitment to furthering the kingdom of God. First, we’ll see how the Scriptures speak of God’s kingdom or rule in both broad and narrow senses. Second, we’ll look at the kingdom of God during the primeval history, the earliest stages of earth’s history. Third, we’ll explore the development of God’s kingdom in the history of the nation of Israel. And fourth, we’ll see how the Old Testament concept of the kingdom of God reaches its fulfillment in the New Testament age. Let’s look first at the way the Old Testament speaks of God’s reign in both broad and narrow senses.

# BROAD AND NARROW

Most Christians have heard about the kingdom of God because it’s mentioned so often in the New Testament. More than 60 references to God’s kingdom appear in the gospels of Matthew, Mark and Luke alone. In this lesson, we’ll see how this New Testament emphasis on God’s kingdom is rooted in the Old Testament. Kingdoms and empires, kings and emperors were so much a part of ancient Israelites’ experience that biblical authors felt no need to provide an explicit and succinct explanation of God’s kingdom. But this fact raises a big problem for you and me today. Because of our distance from the ancient world of the Old Testament, we must begin by summarizing the basic concept of God’s kingdom that lies just beneath the surface of every page of the Old Testament.

There are many ways to sum up how the Old Testament speaks of God’s kingdom, but we’ll look in just two directions. First, we’ll see that, in a broad sense, God’s rule is complete and unchanging. And second, in a narrow sense, God’s rule is also incomplete and developing throughout history. Let’s consider first the complete and unchanging reign of God.

## UNCHANGING

In Psalm 93:1-2, we find this praise of God, the Creator:

> The Lord reigns; he is robed in majesty … he has put on strength as his belt. Yes, the world is established; it shall never be moved. Your throne is established from of old; you are from everlasting (Psalm 93:1-2).

As we see here, the fact that God created and sustains everything led the psalmist to declare, “The Lord reigns.” He is the supreme king over all creation. Time and again, the Old Testament acknowledges this fundamental belief. God created and sustains all things, and he is sovereign over all. In this broader sense, his reign or kingdom is universal and unchanging.

This belief in the unwavering, universal reign of God as the Creator and Sustainer is one of the most striking differences between the faith of ancient Israelites and the religions of the nations that surrounded them. Neighboring religions commonly taught that various gods competed for sovereignty and that the power of these gods ebbed and flowed with changing circumstances. In some cases, gods were thought to rise and fall from positions of power with the annual cycles of the seasons. In other cases, gods were believed to rise and fall from positions of heavenly authority as their favored nations experienced victories and defeats in war.

But such concepts were not part of biblical faith. Yahweh, the God of Israel, was the sole Creator and Sustainer of all, the unwavering ruler over the entire creation — even over powerful spiritual creatures or so-called “gods.” Through every cycle of nature, every defeat and victory in battle, God’s kingship is universal and unchanging. And in this sense, all of creation has always been and always will be his kingdom.

> So, God is king over everything. You see this in Genesis 1 in how everything in creation obeys him. Psalm 24 says “The earth is the Lord’s and everything in it,” for he created it. “Who is this King of glory? [It is] the Lord!” You see, he’s king over everything. He owns it all and that never changes… If you trace the Bible from Genesis to Revelation you see God sovereign over every aspect of creation, of humanity, everything. — Dr. Jonathan D. Worthington

> God is absolutely sovereign, and that is a position that Arminians as well as Calvinists hold. That is a position that is absolutely clear in Scripture; God is completely sovereign and we follow his will at all times, and our choice does not subvert his will. Our choice is meant to be in keeping with his sovereign will. — Dr. Grant R. Osborne

As much as Old Testament authors believed, in a broad sense, that God’s rule over creation is complete and unchanging, they also spoke of a second, narrow sense in which God’s kingdom or rule was incomplete and developing in history.
