## Ongoing Expansion

Genesis 1:3-30 tells us six times that when God looked at his creation, he saw that it was “good.” And in verse 31, on the sixth day, he looked at his work and saw that all he had made was “very good.” The word translated “good” — tov (‫)טוֹב‬ in Hebrew — means, here and in other places in the Old Testament, “pleasant,” “pleasing,” and even “beautiful.” When the Bible says that creation was good, it means that God approved of his work. But as we’re about to see, what God had done was only the beginning of something much greater that was to occur on the earth.

All too often, well-meaning Christians mistakenly believe that when God said his creation was “very good,” he meant that there was nothing left to be done or nothing to be improved. But this was not the case at all. After all, in Genesis 2:18 God also said “It is not good that the man should be alone.” The darkness, the chaos and the deep that once engulfed the world had only been restricted; they had not been eliminated. God began by placing humanity in his sacred, royal garden. But God also called Adam in Genesis 1:28 to fill, to subdue, and to have dominion over the entire earth. Creation was “very good” at the end of the first primeval week, but only in the sense that everything was ready — ready to fulfill God’s larger kingdom purposes for his creation.

As we read in Genesis 2:8-9:

> The Lord God planted a garden in Eden, in the east … And out of the ground the Lord God made to spring up every tree that is pleasant to the sight and good for food. The tree of life was in the midst of the garden, and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil (Genesis 2:8-9).

Think about it this way: In the opening chapters of Genesis, God shaped the world in the ways artists often make pencil sketches on their canvases prior to painting a full landscape. God established the basic order necessary for the world to become what he planned for it to be one day, but he didn’t immediately paint the entire canvas of the world.

Instead, in his inscrutable wisdom, God painted just one portion of the earth with magnificent colors. He adorned it as the centerpiece of the earth. This region of the earth was called Eden. Within Eden was a garden — a wondrously beautiful place, a magnificent sacred paradise fit for the special presence of the King of heaven. It was so holy, so set apart from the rest of creation, that God walked there and displayed his visible glory. But as magnificent as the garden was, God’s goal for history was not that the earth would stay in this condition. Rather, the entire earth was to become like the holy Garden of Eden so that one day, his visible glory would fill the entire creation. The condition of the earth at the end of the first week was just the starting point for all that the Old Testament teaches about the developing, historical kingdom of God.

> So, our creation cultural mandate is to be stewards, is to be God’s creatures in relationship to him, to expand the borders of that garden sanctuary, to do so in worship, devotion, obedience, exploring all the resources of his creation, and that, of course, will be picked up ultimately in the new heavens and the new earth as well. — Dr. Stephen J. Wellum

So far, we’ve seen that the primeval period began with God preparing the world to be the place of his developing, historical kingdom. Now, we should turn to a second crucial facet of the biblical record: the role God ordained for people at this stage of world history.
