## Expansion

According to God’s promise to Abraham in Genesis 12:3, possessing the Promised Land was for a much greater purpose. As God said:

> I will bless those who bless you, and him who dishonors you I will curse, and in you all the families of the earth shall be blessed (Genesis 12:3).

In this passage, God directly drew Abraham’s attention to the impact he and his descendants would have on all nations. God promised to bless and curse other nations in response to their reaction to Abraham. But notice the final result of this twofold process. God promised that Abraham and his descendants would bring God’s blessings to all the families of the earth. This is why, in Romans 4:13, the apostle Paul summarized God’s promise to Abraham and his seed in this way:

> Abraham and his offspring received the promise that he would be heir of the world (Romans 4:13, NIV).

Adam and Eve were called to fill the entire earth and to have dominion over it, but sin had divided the human race between those who served God and those who did not. But God chose Abraham and Israel to bring his blessings to all nations on earth who would receive him. And as followers of Christ, we know that this promise is fulfilled through Jesus, the perfect son of Abraham.

The people of Israel were well aware that they were destined to serve God’s purposes by possessing more than the Promised Land. In the days of Moses, two and a half tribes received permission to occupy lands east of the Jordan. And David, Solomon and other kings in David’s dynasty extended Israel’s borders to the north, to the east and to the south. Even when Israel was sent into exile, the prophets reassured God’s people that, not only would they return to the Promised Land, but the Messiah would one day lead them in spreading God’s kingdom to the ends of the earth.

With the place of God’s kingdom in the days of Old Testament Israel in mind, we’re ready to turn to the people of the kingdom during this time.

# PEOPLE

We saw earlier that God honored human beings by creating them as his royal priestly images. And passages like Genesis 9:6 and James 3:9 indicate that all human beings still have the honor and the responsibility of serving God’s kingdom purposes as his images. Still, in his inscrutable wisdom, God ordained that the descendants of Abraham, the people of Israel, would have a special role of leading the way in the spread of God’s rule throughout the world. The history of Israel is complex, but it will help to summarize how God ensured that the people of Israel would carry out this kingdom mission.

We’ll look at three matters related to the people of God’s kingdom in the history of Israel: first, the selection of Israel as a special people; second, the formation of the people of Israel into a kingdom of priests; and third, God’s designation of official priests and kings to lead Israel. Consider first the selection of Israel as the special people of God.

## Selection of Israel

As we saw earlier, after the sin of Adam and Eve, the human race divided between the seed of the serpent — those who served the purposes of Satan; and the seed of the woman — those who served the purposes of God. According to Genesis 5, Adam’s third son, Seth, became the father of a faithful line of humanity that led to righteous Noah and his sons and daughters-in-law. Noah had three sons: Shem, Ham and Japheth. But of these three, Shem and his descendants were special in the eyes of God. All of this genealogical information in the book of Genesis was designed to explain the background of God’s selection of Israel as his chosen people.

From the line of Shem, God chose one man to serve as the seed of the woman — Israel’s patriarch, Abraham. The patriarchal history of Genesis reveals that Abraham had a miraculous son, Isaac, who continued this chosen line. Then Isaac’s son Jacob, also known as Israel, became God’s specially honored image. And finally, Jacob had twelve sons, Joseph and his brothers, and these twelve sons were the fathers of the twelve tribes of Israel. Out of all the nations of humanity, the tribes of Israel were God’s special people, the people of his kingdom.

In the days of Moses, God’s selection of the tribes of Israel as his special people moved forward. God brought the tribes of Israel out of bondage in Egypt and formed them into a nation, a kingdom of priests to fulfill his goal of spreading his kingdom throughout the world.
