## Exodus and Conquest

You’ll recall that when Moses and the Israelites passed through the Red Sea, they sang a song of praise to God that appears in Exodus 15:1-18. This passage highlights the fact that God redeemed Israel from Egypt in order to further Adam and Eve’s original mission by expanding his kingdom on the earth.

In Exodus 15:13 we read these words:

> You have led in your steadfast love the people whom you have redeemed; you have guided them by your strength to your holy abode (Exodus 15:13).

Notice that the Israelites praised God because he was guiding them toward his “holy abode” or dwelling.

As we’ve seen, just like Eden, the Promised Land was to be the center of God’s special holy presence on the earth. But more than this, we should note that the term in Exodus 15:13 translated “guided” — nahal (‫ל‬ ַ‫נָה‬ ) in Hebrew — is associated in a number of Scriptures with shepherds leading sheep. Shepherding imagery like this was often used to describe the activities of kings, both in the ancient Near East in general, and in the Bible. God guided his people toward his holy dwelling as their shepherding king. It’s not surprising then that the theme of God’s kingship and kingdom appears explicitly in Exodus 15:17-18. At the end of the song at the Red Sea we read:

> You will bring them in and plant them on your own mountain, the place, O Lord, which you have made for your abode, the sanctuary, O Lord, which your hands have established. The Lord will reign forever and ever (Exodus 15:17-18).

According to these verses, God took Israel toward his holy mountain, a sanctuary that was later revealed to be Jerusalem. And that mountain sanctuary would be God’s “abode” — yashav (‫ב‬ ַ‫יָשׁ‬ ) in Hebrew — a term that often connotes a king’s enthronement. In light of the other royal motifs in this passage, it’s best to understand that this sanctuary will be the place of God’s royal enthronement. This is why verse 18 immediately praises God with explicit royal terminology, saying that, from there, “The Lord will reign forever and ever.”

> Israel has experienced God’s deliverance and sings this song of victory at the Red Sea: “The Lord will reign forever and ever.” But this is a different kind of king… And unlike kings who live far away, who you may only encounter through their face on a coin — or in the modern world, their picture on TV or in the newspapers — Israel’s God, the Lord, the true King, invites God’s people to come and be with him on his holy mountain, Sinai, and then even more profoundly makes a means, the tabernacle, where God can literally come down and abide in the midst of his people forever. — Dr. Brian D. Russell

When God acted as Israel’s king by leading the nation like a shepherd to the Promised Land, he did this to establish them around his royal throne on earth. The purpose of the exodus and conquest of the Promised Land was to re-establish God’s reign, his kingship, and his kingdom on earth.

Having touched on the progress of God’s kingdom in the periods of promise and exodus and conquest, we should look at a third stage of Israel’s history as a nation: the stage of the empire. Under David and Solomon’s leadership, Israel became a bona fide kingdom with a human king who led the people of God in worship and in obedience to God’s commands.
