## Empire

Unfortunately, on the basis of 1 Samuel 8, many evangelical interpreters have mistakenly believed that God never planned for Israel to have a human king. But from the days of the patriarchs, God revealed that, at the right time, Israel was to have a human king to further the kingdom of God. God determined that this human king would be a descendant of David. He would lead the nation of Israel, and eventually every nation on earth. And he would lead them in fulfillment of humanity’s original purpose — to spread God’s kingdom to the ends of the earth. And of course, as every Christian knows, Jesus is the perfectly righteous king from the line of David who will bring the kingdom of God to earth as it is in heaven.

Sadly, Israel’s kings failed to fulfill this calling from God. In fact, 1 and 2 Kings makes it clear that many of Israel’s kings, even from the house of David, led the people of Israel into rebellion against God. And these rebellions eventually led to the great troubles of the exile. Still, by God’s grace, the reigns of David and his son Solomon represented a significant forward movement of God’s kingdom on earth. Despite their failures, they secured and expanded the territories of God’s kingdom. And with the establishment of David’s throne in Jerusalem, God put into place the permanent dynasty that would represent his rule on the earth and lead many in the true worship of God. Listen to the way 1 Chronicles 29:23 describes the throne of David and Solomon:

> Solomon sat on the throne of the Lord as king in place of David his father (1 Chronicles 29:23).

As we see here, the throne of David was no ordinary throne. It was “the throne of the Lord.” Much like Adam and Eve were originally called to serve as God’s vice-regents, the royal house of David represented the royal authority of God himself.

Beyond this, the house of David was also a royal priesthood. David and Solomon arranged and supervised the services of priests and Levites who led the people of Israel in the worship of God. And David prepared for Solomon to build a temple for God in Jerusalem. Solomon placed the ark of the covenant that David had brought to Jerusalem in the temple. And according to David, this ark of the covenant was God’s footstool on earth. As David declared in 1 Chronicles 28:2:

> I had it in my heart to build a house of rest for the ark of the covenant of the Lord and for the footstool of our God, and I made preparations for building (1 Chronicles 28:2).

As Isaiah 66:1 tells us, God’s throne was in heaven, but the footstool of his throne, where his feet touched the earth, was the ark of the covenant in the temple. The visible glory of God filled the temple, much like God had appeared to Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden. Jerusalem’s temple became the centerpiece of God’s kingship on earth.

So, we see that by the time of David and Solomon, Israel had developed from a migrating tribe in the days of Abraham, to a nation established through exodus and conquest, to an empire with a king and a temple in the city of Jerusalem. But what was God’s purpose in bringing Israel to this point? What was the grand goal of Israel’s empire? In Psalm 72:1-17, the psalmist described the glorious destiny of Israel under the rule of David’s house in this way:

> Give the king your justice, O God, and your righteousness to the royal son! … May he have dominion from sea to sea, and from the River to the ends of the earth! … May all kings fall down before him, all nations serve him! … May his name endure forever, his fame continue as long as the sun! May people be blessed in him, all nations call him blessed! (Psalm 72:1-17).

In this passage the psalmist prayed for “the king” and the “royal son.” He prayed that David’s dynasty would be characterized by “justice” and “righteousness.” But he also prayed for the expansion of David’s reign to the whole earth — that he would reign “from sea to sea,” from “the River to the ends of the earth.” He prayed that “all kings” would bow before the king of Israel and serve him. He prayed that the king’s “name” would “endure forever” and that “his fame” would "continue as long as the sun.” No wonder then that, in verse 17, the psalmist wrote these words about David’s dynasty: “May people be blessed in him, all nations call him blessed!”

The allusion to God’s promise in Genesis 12:3 — that Abraham would be a blessing to all the families of the earth — is obvious. God’s purpose for choosing Abraham and his descendants would finally be fulfilled when the house of David spread God’s blessing to all nations. Then the faithful will receive justice, and prosperity and peace will abound throughout the earth. With this image of the future in mind, the psalmist closed in verse 19 with this resounding praise to God:

> Blessed be [God’s] glorious name forever; may the whole earth be filled with his glory! Amen and Amen! (Psalm 72:19).

Psalm 72:19 reveals the ultimate goal for all of the developments that took place in Israel, from the patriarchs’ promises, through the exodus and conquest, and to the empire. These stages of the kingdom were all intended to fill the entire earth with God’s glory. As God’s kingdom spread from the borders of Israel to the ends of the earth through the reign of David’s house, God’s glorious presence would fill the whole world just as it fills heaven.

> One day the whole earth will be filled with God’s radiance. It will fill it in every nook and cranny so that, according to the symbolic imagery of the book of Revelation, there won’t even need to be a sun because God’s glory will light, it will radiate throughout all of the cosmos. We see that plan introduced in Genesis 1 where God creates man and woman in his image, and then he goes and tells them to fill the earth and subdue it, showing us that even all the way back in Genesis 1, God’s plan was not merely to fill the Garden but to fill the whole earth with his image, a worshiping image, reflecting back to him his glory. — Dr. Scott Redd

So far, we’ve seen how the Old Testament speaks of the kingdom of God in both broad and narrow senses, and how God’s kingdom developed during the primeval history and the history of the nation of Israel. Now we’ll turn to our last topic: the fulfillment of God’s kingdom in the New Testament age.
