# NEW TESTAMENT

If there’s one thing that all Christians should affirm, it’s this: the heart of Jesus’ ministry, the heart of the entire New Testament, is the gospel. The proclamation of the Christian gospel, or “good news,” is central to our Christian faith. While most of us would agree with this, we often don’t consider just how deeply the Christian good news is rooted in the Old Testament. The good news of the Christian faith is the proclamation that Jesus overcomes the failures of God’s kingdom in the past and succeeds in spreading God’s victorious reign to the ends of the world. This is the good news we believe. It is good news of the kingdom of God.

Listen to the way Matthew summarized Jesus’ preaching in Matthew 4:23:

> [Jesus] went throughout all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues and proclaiming the gospel of the kingdom (Matthew 4:23).

As we see here, Jesus went about “proclaiming the gospel” or good news. But what was this good news about? It was the good news about “the kingdom”. The good news that we believe and proclaim to others is that Christ fulfills all the Old Testament hopes for the glorious kingdom of God to come to earth as it is in heaven.

> When we speak of the gospel of the kingdom, or the good news of God’s reign, it helps us to think about what early believers, for whom the Bible was the Septuagint — the Greek translation of the Old Testament — would have thought of. In Isaiah 52 God announces that he’s going to restore his people, and he says … “How beautiful on the mountains are the feet of those who bring good news … who bring glad tidings … saying to Zion, ‘Your God reigns!’” And it’s said to be good news of peace, so it’s good news of God’s peace, it’s good news of God’s reign, it’s good news that God is saving his people, that God is acting on behalf of his people to bring in righteousness and justice in the world… But, already, when Jesus came the first time, he gave us a sample of that, a foretaste as he was healing people and doing his marvelous works. They were a foretaste of something that we’ll experience more fully in the kingdom in its fullness. — Dr. Craig S. Keener

We’ll explore God’s kingdom in the New Testament as we’ve explored other stages of biblical history. We’ll look first at what the New Testament says about the place of God’s kingdom. Second, we’ll speak of the people of the kingdom. And third, we’ll look into the progress of the kingdom during the New Testament period. Let’s look first at the place of God’s kingdom in the New Testament.

## PLACE

Sadly, many well-meaning followers of Christ believe that New Testament faith has little if anything to do with God’s kingdom on earth. We often hear that the Old Testament was oriented toward the physical world, but New Testament faith is oriented toward immaterial heavenly realities and inward spiritual matters. Now, there are ways in which this is true. Christ’s followers have their citizenship in heaven rather than in earthly kingdoms because, at this moment, our king, Jesus, is in heaven at the right hand of the Father. We also focus on inward spiritual matters because, at this time, the Holy Spirit renews us inwardly even as our bodies suffer corruption. But we have to be very careful here. New Testament faith is not disconnected from God’s earthly kingdom purposes in the Old Testament. Rather, New Testament faith proclaims that Jesus fulfills the last stage of God’s kingdom on earth. He is spreading this kingdom of peace, joy and goodness to the ends of the earth.

In many respects, the New Testament has the same orientation toward the place of God’s kingdom as we find in the Old Testament. First, the New Testament indicates that Christ’s kingdom work began at the geographical center of God’s reign — in the land of Israel. And second, the New Testament also emphasizes how Christ fulfills God’s call for the geographical expansion of his reign to the ends of the earth. Let’s look first at the geographical center of God’s kingdom in the New Testament age.
