## Expansion

As we noted earlier, in Matthew 6:10 Jesus taught his disciples to pray for God’s kingdom to extend throughout the world when he said:

> Your kingdom come, your will be done, on earth as it is in heaven (Matthew 6:10).

Throughout his ministry, Jesus kept his disciples’ eyes focused on this worldwide goal. As we read in Matthew 24:14, Jesus told his disciples:

> This gospel of the kingdom will be proclaimed throughout the whole world as a testimony to all nations, and then the end will come (Matthew 24:14).

The message of the good news of the arrival of God’s kingdom was to be spread throughout the world, and then Jesus would return. The New Testament emphasizes that Jesus and his first century apostles and prophets committed themselves to spreading God’s kingdom from the Promised Land to all the nations of the world.

With this orientation toward the place of God’s kingdom in the New Testament in mind, we should turn our attention to the people of the kingdom in the New Testament.

## PEOPLE

In the beginning, God ordained that human beings were to spread the kingdom of God. God also called Israel to this task in a special way and ordained the house of David to lead the nation of Israel in fulfilling this calling. But, as we mentioned earlier, by the end of Old Testament history, the house of David and the people of Israel had fallen short of this calling so much that God cursed them with the horrors of exile. And for hundreds of years, the people of Israel suffered under the tyranny of God’s enemies.

So, it’s no wonder that Jesus and his followers spoke of “gospel” or good news. They proclaimed the good news that God’s original design for the human race was about to be fulfilled by Jesus. Jesus would defeat God’s enemies and bless God’s people throughout the earth.

To grasp how the New Testament draws attention to the people of God’s kingdom, we’ll touch on two subjects: first, the service of Christ himself as the supreme, perfectly righteous image of God; and second, the service of believers as renewed images of God. Let’s consider first Christ’s faithful service as the supreme image of God.
