## SANCTION
	
In the modern world, there are many Christians who believe that the church is unnecessary — or at least they act as it if is. In many cases, sincere believers think that organizations like the church are human inventions that intrude into our personal relationship with God. But Scripture teaches a very different perspective. In the broadest sense, the church is God’s kingdom on earth, the congregation of his special people, and a central means through which he dispenses grace to those who are faithful to him. According to the Scriptures, the church is critical to establishing and maintaining our relationship with God.
When we say that the church is sanctioned by God, we mean that he created it for a purpose, and that he vested it with authority. In general terms, the Scriptures teach that God approves of the church. It is the organization he ordained to carry out his mission in the world. As Jesus himself said in Matthew 16:18:

> I will build my church, and the gates of Hades will not overcome it (Matthew 16:18).

The church is not the invention of fallen human beings. Jesus himself is the founder of the church. 
So, even though we see flaws in the church throughout history, and sometimes churches turn so far away from the gospel that they are no longer the church of God, we must not conclude that the church is useless or unnecessary. The Apostles’ Creed affirms this divine sanction for the church with these simple words: 

> I believe in … the … church.

As you will recall from prior lessons, the Apostles’ Creed is a summary of the early churches’ rules of faith. And those rules of faith were summaries of Scripture. So, when the creed professes belief in the church, it intends to affirm what the Bible teaches about the church. And the most basic aspect of the Bible’s teaching about the church is that God appointed the church to fulfill his purposes in the world.
As we consider the church’s divine sanction, we’ll focus on three main ideas. First, we’ll look at the Old Testament background of the church. Second, we’ll focus on what Jesus did to establish the church during his earthly ministry. And third, we’ll explore some implications of these biblical points of view. Let’s begin with the Old Testament background to the church.


### OLD TESTAMENT

The concept of the church in the New Testament actually finds its roots in the Old Testament.

> Many would think that the church has started by the day of Pentecost when Jesus went up to heaven and he poured his Spirit on the disciples. But I think this is a misunderstanding of the nature of the church. I think the church is a continuity of the people of God in the Old Testament. God has called Abraham and the people of the Old Testament, and we can easily say that this is the church, the beginning of the church. So, the church has started there, it continues in our age, and it will continue to the consummation, to the day when Jesus comes back from heaven. 
> 
> —	Dr. Riad Kassis

The New Testament speaks many times of the church using the Greek word ekklesia. But this term was derived from the Septuagint, the Greek translation of the Old Testament. In the Old Testament, ekklesia and its Hebrew counterpart is frequently used to identify the gathered nation of Israel. We see this in Deuteronomy 9:10, 31:30; Judges 20:2; 1 Kings 8:14; Psalm 22:22, 25; and many other places.
Even in the New Testament, where ekklesia has become a technical term referring to the church, the word is still used to refer to the assembly of Old Testament Israel. For instance, in Acts 7:38, we read these words in Stephen’s speech to his murderers: 

> [Moses] was in the assembly in the desert, with the angel who spoke to him on Mount Sinai, and with our fathers; and he received living words to pass on to us (Acts 7:38).

Here, the Greek word translated assembly is ekklesia, which is more commonly translated “church.” This indicates that the assembly of Israel was the Old Testament equivalent and predecessor to the New Testament church.
And in 1 Peter 2:9, Peter also called the church by names that applied to Israel in the Old Testament. Listen to what he wrote: 

> You are a chosen people, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people belonging to God (1 Peter 2:9).

Here, Peter quoted from several Old Testament passages that spoke of the nation of Israel. And he applied Israel’s special names to the New Testament church. In this way, he indicated that there are important continuities between these two groups.

> If we think about a text such 1 Peter 2 where Peter applies a whole series of titles that were originally given to Israel in the Old Testament now to the church: “You are royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people belonging to God.” We see that Peter is teaching a group of churches in a variety of regions who are predominantly Gentiles to see themselves as really the fulfillment of God’s promises to Israel, and to recognize that that is their identity. 
> 
> —	Dr. Dennis E. Johnson

Of course, this is not to say that the New Testament church is precisely the same as Israel’s Old Testament assemblies. They are connected, but they are different as well. In Romans 11, Paul used two metaphors to talk about the relationship between the Old Testament assembly of Israel and the Christian church. He spoke of them as a batch of dough, and an olive tree.
Listen to what he wrote in Romans 11:16:

> If the part of the dough offered as firstfruits is holy, then the whole batch is holy; if the root is holy, so are the branches (Romans 11:16).

First, Paul said that the Old Testament assembly was the firstfruits of the same batch of dough from which the New Testament church had been made.
Leviticus 23:17 required Israel to bring a firstfruits offering of bread to the Lord. The firstfruits were not a separate harvest. They were part of the whole harvest, and representative of the whole harvest. So, when Paul said that Israel and the New Testament church came from the same batch of dough, he indicated that both Israel and the New Testament Christians were part of the same organization, the same people of God, the same church.
Second, Paul said that the Old Testament assembly was the root of a tree, and that the New Testament church was the branches of this same tree. Paul actually expanded on this illustration for several verses. He compared the church throughout all ages to a cultivated olive tree. The Old Testament church, consisting primarily of Jews, was the bulk of the tree: roots, trunk, and many branches. And Gentile Christians were wild olive branches that had been grafted onto the tree. Put simply, Gentile Christians were grafted into the Jewish church. So, even though the church in Paul’s day consisted of both Jews and Gentiles, its trunk and roots were the same tree that stretched back in time throughout the Old Testament. Yes, this new tree is different in many respects. It has been improved and built up. But it is still the same tree. In the same way, the Old Testament church has been improved and built up into the New Testament church. They are different in important ways, and they represent different stages of growth. But they are still the same church. 
Now that we have considered the sanction of the church from the perspective of Old Testament background, let’s see how Jesus built his church in a way that relied on but also advanced the Old Testament church.
