## HOLY

Throughout the Bible, many different words are used to refer to the idea of holiness. In the New Testament, the church is described as holy or sanctified. And people who are part of the church are called saints. All three of these words — holy, sanctified and saints — come from the same word group in Greek. “Holy” translates the adjective hagios. “Sanctified” is from the verb hagiazo, which means make holy. And “saints” is from the noun hagios, meaning one who is holy.
In the Old Testament, the same concepts are represented by Hebrew words like the adjective qadosh, meaning holy; the verb qadash, meaning make holy; and noun qodesh, meaning one who is holy. 
Now, when we talk about holiness, many Christians are used to thinking that holiness is what distinguishes God from his creatures. It is often said that God’s holiness is his quality of being entirely other, or entirely different from his creatures. But this is not the only way the word “holy” is used in Scripture. The Bible also refers to creatures and objects as holy when they have special qualities that reflect God’s own holiness. And it is in this sense that the Apostles’ Creed says that the church is holy.
We’ll consider the idea that the church is holy in two parts. First, we’ll explore the definition of the word “holy.” And second, we’ll use this definition to identify the people that are holy. Let’s begin with the biblical definition of holiness.


### DEFINITION
	
In Scripture, the concept of holiness is complex. But it is fair to say that when the Bible refers to someone or something as holy, the most basic idea is that the subject is morally pure, and in a related sense, “holy” can also describe people and things that are set apart for use in special service to God.
Let’s look at both aspects of this definition, beginning with being morally pure. When we say that someone or something is morally pure, we mean that it is free from sin and corruption. In the sense of moral purity, holiness is rooted in God’s character. Scripture describes God as the Holy One in many places, such as in 2 Kings 19:22; Proverbs 9:10; Isaiah 30:11-15; and 1 John 2:20. 

> It’s not just that God is bigger than we are; it’s not just that God is infinite and we are finite, but that he is morally other than we are. In him there is no darkness or shifting shadow. In him there is no evil impulse or inclination to do what is wrong. In him is not the slightest hint or desire to do evil. 
> 
> —	Dr. J. Ligon Duncan III

Because God is utterly holy, anything sinful that enters his immediate presence is subject to his judgment and wrath. We see this in places like 1 Samuel 6:20, 2 Kings 24:3, and Hebrews 12:14. Although God may withhold judgment for a while, his holy presence will ultimately destroy those whose sin is not covered. As a result, anyone or anything that is to enter his presence must first be made holy. For instance, consider Isaiah’s words in Isaiah 6:3-7:

> [The seraphim] were calling to one another: “Holy, holy, holy is the Lord Almighty” … “Woe to me!” I cried. “I am ruined! For I am a man of unclean lips, and I live among a people of unclean lips, and my eyes have seen the King, the Lord Almighty.” Then one of the seraphs flew to me with a live coal in his hand, which he had taken with tongs from the altar. With it he touched my mouth and said … “[Y]our guilt is taken away and your sin atoned for.” (Isaiah 6:3-7).

In this passage, Isaiah feared that he would be destroyed in the special presence of the Holy Lord because of his guilt or sin. So, the seraph, one of God’s attending angels, cleansed Isaiah’s sin with a hot coal taken from God’s holy altar. By this cleansing, Isaiah was purified from sin — he was made holy. And because of his new holiness, he was able to stand in the Lord’s presence without falling under judgment.
As we see in Isaiah 6, God’s holiness is one of his communicable attributes — an attribute that characterizes him perfectly and completely, but that can also characterize his creatures in finite ways. The communicable nature of holiness lies behind the many biblical commands for believers to be holy, as in Ephesians 1:4, Hebrews 12:14, and 1 Peter 1:15-16. We are to strive to be as morally pure as God is. Of course, in our own strength we can never succeed in this attempt. But Christ himself has perfect moral purity. And when we are in him, his righteousness is credited to us, and we are counted as being absolutely pure, completely free from sin and corruption.
The second aspect of our definition of the word holy is that it describes people and things that are set apart for use in special service to God. In this sense, things can be holy even if they are not morally pure. As just one example, listen to what Paul wrote in 1 Corinthians 7:14:

> The unbelieving husband is made holy through his wife, and the unbelieving wife is made holy through her husband (1 Corinthians 7:14, NRSV).

Here, Paul said that when a believer is married to an unbeliever, the unbeliever is made holy, or as other translations put it, the unbeliever is “sanctified.” The idea is that the unbeliever is identified with God and made useful for his service — even though the unbeliever has not been morally purified by God in Christ.
Some Christians find it strange to think that God sets apart imperfect and impure people for his service. But if we think about it, the Bible provides many examples of unbelievers that God set apart to accomplish his will. Probably the greatest example of this is the fact the apostle Judas betrayed our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. As Jesus himself taught, Judas was chosen for that very purpose. And his betrayal resulted in the purest, most holy offering ever rendered to God — the precious death of his Son. And if God is able to use even wicked unbelievers in his service, how much more can he be glorified by the special service of the holy ones that love him?
Now, as we have seen, the concept of holiness has many dimensions in the Bible. So we must be careful to understand what the Scriptures mean when they use words like “holy,” or “sanctified” or even “saints” as descriptions of the church. Sometimes, the Bible is calling attention to the fact that true believers in the church are morally pure because of the holiness of Christ given to them. At other times, it refers to people who are set apart from the world for special service to God, even if they are not true believers. And in some cases, it refers to the idea that true believers have been set apart for special service to God. 
Whatever the case, one thing we know is that everything and everyone that is holy is special to God. We revere God’s name, refusing to take it in vain, because it is holy. We submit to the Bible because it is the holy word of our holy God. We respect and strive for moral purity in every aspect of life, knowing that the Lord calls us to holy lives. And we participate in and submit to his holy church. Wherever we find holiness, we recognize God’s hand, and we take special care to treat it with godly respect.
With this definition of “holy” in mind, let’s use it to explore the identity of the people that are holy.


### PEOPLE

Most broadly speaking, the Bible refers to people as “holy” when they are set apart from the rest of the world in order to be useful in special service to God. For example, the entire nation of Old Testament Israel was regularly called “holy” because God was in covenant with the nation. We see this in places like Exodus 19:5-6, Deuteronomy 7:6-9 and 28:9, and Ezekiel 37:26-28. 
And this theme is also continued in the New Testament church. For example, Luke 1:72 speaks of Jesus as coming to fulfill God’s holy covenant. And because the church is understood to be the renewed and restored Israel of the new covenant, it is also called holy. We see this in Colossians 3:12, Hebrews 10:29, and several other places. As one example, listen again to Peter’s words to the New Testament church in 1 Peter 2:9:

> You are a chosen people, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people belonging to God (1 Peter 2:9).

Here, Peter quoted from several Old Testament passages that spoke of the holiness of Israel, but he applied them to the church. His point was that the church in both the Old and the New Testaments was one and the same holy group.
As we have seen, though, not everyone in Israel or the New Testament church was a true believer. Even so, they were all considered holy because they were part of God’s covenant community, that is, the people who were in covenant with God. 
For the believers in the covenant community, their holiness exceeded the holiness of the unbelievers. Unbelievers were holy only because they were set apart for God. But believers were holy, not only because they were set apart, but also because in Christ they were morally pure and obedient to God. Of course, the goal was always for the entire covenant community to believe — for everyone to be faithful to God and to live morally pure lives.
One helpful way to think about holy people can be found in the traditional distinction between the visible church and the invisible church. Let’s look at each of these categories, beginning with the visible church.
