## CATHOLIC

 Our discussion of the term catholic will divide into three parts. First, we’ll offer a definition of the word “catholic.” Second, we’ll look at the catholicity of the visible church. And third, we’ll turn to the catholicity of the invisible church. Let’s begin with a definition of the word “catholic.”


### DEFINITION

As we mentioned in an earlier lesson, the word catholic means: universal; or including all Christians in all congregations. The word “catholic” translates the Latin word catholicus, which in turn derives from the Greek preposition kata and the adjective holos, meaning “whole” or “complete.” It’s not a reference to the Roman Catholic Church. Rather, it’s a description of the unity that exists between all churches that faithfully follow Christ.
You will remember from earlier lessons in this series, that the form of the Apostles’ Creed we have today developed from early baptismal creeds. At the time these early creeds were written, the various Christian churches around the world had not yet come together under a single, overarching church government. So, when the Apostles’ Creed speaks of the catholicity of the church, it does not have in mind an organization of all Christian congregations. Rather, it’s talking about the unity of the Holy Spirit that exists between all legitimate Christian churches, despite our organizational differences. At this stage in history, the word “catholic” was inclusive. It was meant to extend the name “church” to every Christian congregation.
This idea was in keeping with Paul’s teaching in 1 Corinthians 1:2, where he addressed his letter in this way:

> To the church of God in Corinth, to those sanctified in Christ Jesus and called to be holy, together with all those everywhere who call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ — their Lord and ours … (1 Corinthians 1:2).

Here, Paul indicated that the various Christian congregations in Corinth, which he referred to collectively as “the church … in Corinth,” were part of a larger church that included all who called on the name of Christ, regardless of where they lived. 
In the middle of the third century, Cyprian of Carthage began to emphasize the role of bishops or priests in defining the church. In his Epistle 68, he had this to say:

> They are the Church who are a people united to the priest … [T]he Church, which is Catholic and one, is not cut nor divided, but is indeed connected and bound together by the cement of priests who cohere with one another.

For Cyprian, the church’s unity was rooted in the unity of the clergy and its ministry. As this view began to grow, Christians also began to affirm the unity of the church in its unity of government. The church was a single organization that was present everywhere throughout the world because its bishops and priests were present throughout the world. 
Even at this point, though, the word “catholic” was intended to be inclusive, encompassing all people and congregations that were called by the name of Christ and that were faithful to the traditional doctrines of the church.
Later, however, the church was fragmented by divisions. For example, in A.D. 1054 the Roman Catholic Church excommunicated the churches of Eastern Orthodoxy, and the churches of Eastern Orthodoxy excommunicated the Roman Catholic Church. 
At this time, these churches began to use the word “catholic” in a new exclusive sense. By insisting that their own churches were catholic or universal, each meant to identify itself as the only valid church, and to condemn rival churches. 
Later, in the wake of the Reformation of the 16th century, most Protestant churches took a different approach. Essentially, they returned to the original meaning of the creed, appealing to the earlier inclusive meaning of the word “catholic.” In agreement with both Scripture and the Apostles’ Creed, Protestant churches affirmed the unity of Spirit that all Christian churches share under the headship of Christ. And they recognized that this unity could be maintained even without solidarity in the area of church government, and without losing the positive contributions made by each of their denominations. 
Recognizing the catholicity of the church in the modern world means affirming the validity of every church that maintains the doctrines affirmed in the Apostles’ Creed. All Christians in all faithful churches are under Christ’s covenant headship, and all true believers are blessed with the gifts of the Holy Spirit. And for this reason, we should be eager to benefit from the gifts of every true Christian in every faithful church, and we should be willing to serve alongside them as much as possible. 
With this definition of the word “catholic” in mind, let’s look at the ways in which the visible church can be called “catholic.”


### VISIBLE CATHOLIC CHURCH
	
When we combine our understanding of catholicity with our understanding of the visible church, we can define the visible catholic church as: one worldwide fellowship of all people in covenant with God under the headship of Christ. Obviously, this fellowship is one of Spirit rather than of church government. There is no single denomination whose government extends over all Christian congregations. Rather, the unity of the visible church is based on the fact that each church is in covenant with the same God, and under the covenant headship of the same Christ.
Historically, the visible church has traced its catholicity in a variety of ways. In some traditions, it is traced through church government. The church expands as it multiplies itself, each new minister being ordained and having hands laid on him by those who are already ministers. 
But generally, Protestants have emphasized that the unity of the entire church rests in our faith in Christ and the work of the Spirit, rather than in the succession of ordained ministers and priests. For this reason, new congregations can arise wherever unity of Spirit exists, wherever those who are in covenant with God gather in the name of Christ. Protestants insist that the visible church is catholic because it exists everywhere that people are in covenant with God, under the headship of Christ, in the unity of the Spirit.
One of the most common problems that many Christians face today is knowing which churches they should embrace as part of the catholic or universal church of Christ. In most parts of the world, there are so many varieties of churches that claim to be Christian that well-meaning Christians often go to one of two extremes. Either they open their arms too widely and embrace any church that claims to be Christian, or they exclude everyone except their narrowly defined congregation or denomination. 
One helpful solution to this difficulty can be found in the three traditional marks of the church. These marks were formulated by John Knox in 16th century Scotland, but they represented the thinking of many Protestant churches during his day. Essentially, the marks enable Christians to distinguish genuine congregations of the visible catholic church from impostor congregations.

> The marks of the church were absolutely necessary in order to find out where the church is, because in reality, anything could call itself a church. In points of great theological crisis, such as in the Reformation of the 16th century, the question is, “Where is the true church to be found?” And thus, the reformers, for instance, most carefully defined the marks of the church by saying, “Well it’s not the sign out front. It’s not the architecture of the building. It’s whether or not, first of all, there is the preaching of the word of God.” Wherever there is the right preaching of the word of God, there is a church. Wherever the ordinances, the sacraments, are found rightly administered, there is the church. Later marks included, especially, the discipline of the church — understanding that without that mark of discipline the purity of the church is surrendered, and thus the church eventually is surrendered in terms of its integrity and identity. 
> 
> —	Dr. R. Albert Mohler, Jr.

Let’s take a look at each of the three traditional marks of the visible catholic church, beginning with the Preaching of the word of God. 
There is no church or denomination that has an exclusive claim to the possession, interpretation, application or proclamation of the word of God. Some churches and denominations claim to have the exclusive right to interpret and teach Scripture. Some claim to have special enlightenment that makes their understanding of the Bible truer than all others. But no church perfectly manifests any of the marks, including the preaching of the Word. God has given the Bible to the whole visible church. And he has given the whole visible church his Holy Spirit to help us understand the Bible. We see these things in passages like 1 Timothy 3:15, and Hebrews 4:11-13 and 6:4-6. Moreover, Scripture exhorts the whole visible church to read, to understand, and to teach God’s word, as we see in Matthew 28:20, 1 Timothy 4:17, and 2 Timothy 2:15 and 3:14-17.
The second mark of the church is the right administration of the sacraments of baptism and the Lord’s Supper. These sacraments belong to the entire visible church, not just to one denomination or another. 
It is the privilege and responsibility of every congregation within the visible church to administer the sacraments according to the Scriptures. We see this in the Great Commission’s command to baptize in Matthew 28:19, and in Paul’s teaching on baptism in 1 Corinthians 1:13-17. We also see it in Jesus’ institution of the Lord’s Supper in Luke 22:15-20, where the Lord indicated that the supper was for his entire kingdom, for all those who were included under his covenant headship. Passages like these are the reason that most Protestant churches recognize and affirm the sacraments of other churches and denominations. 
The third traditional mark of the visible catholic church is formal church discipline, such as excommunication.
No Christian enjoys exercising formal church discipline, especially excommunication. And this has often led churches to avoid the use of formal discipline. Of course, forbearance also has biblical warrant, as we can see in the parable of the wheat and the weeds, found in Matthew 13:24-30.
Even so, discipline has its place. There are times when a person’s sin is so troublesome that it must be addressed through discipline — especially when it endangers the church and its reputation. At times like this, discipline is intended both to protect the church and to drive the offender to repentance. Scriptural grounds for formal discipline can be found in passages such as Matthew 16:19 and 18:18, John 20:23, and Titus 3:10. And we see it practiced in passages like 1 Corinthians 5:1-13. Because the entire visible church belongs to Christ and represents him on earth, it’s important for every part of the visible church to protect Christ’s people and to defend his honor through the proper exercise of church discipline.
The marks of the church are still important for us to consider today. They help us ensure that our own congregations remain within the boundaries of the visible catholic church in covenant with God under the headship of Christ. They also help us identify impostors and enemies of the church, so that we can warn Christians away from such groups, and so that we can proclaim to the world that these false groups do not represent our Lord and his gospel. They can also encourage us to work across denominational lines as we engage in ministry. When we recognize that the body of Christ is not limited to our churches or denominations, but extends universally throughout the world wherever the gospel of Christ is proclaimed, we can be encouraged to embrace everyone who is part of the visible church.
Now that we have looked at the universal nature of the visible church, let’s consider some ways in which the invisible church is also catholic or universal.


