### INVISIBLE CATHOLIC CHURCH
	
When we combine our understanding of catholicity with our understanding of the invisible church, we can define the invisible catholic church as: all people from all ages who have been united to Christ for salvation. As we have said, the invisible church is a subsection of the visible church, so it is also true that everyone in the invisible church is in covenant with God under the headship of Christ. But in order to distinguish the invisible church, our definition focuses only on how it differs from the visible church.
While there are many ways to think about the catholicity of the invisible church, we’ll focus on just two. First, the invisible church is universal because there is only one Savior. And second, the invisible church is universal because there is only one true religion that can lead us to that Savior. Let’s look first at the idea that there is only one Savior.


#### One Savior
	
Scripture clearly teaches that Jesus Christ is the only savior available to humanity. He is the only one who has ever had the power to save us, and the only one who ever will. As Peter insisted in Acts 4:12:

> Salvation is found in no one else, for there is no other name under heaven given to men by which we must be saved (Acts 4:12).
 
Jesus Christ has always been the only Savior available to human beings. Our Lord himself proclaimed this truth in John 14:6 when he spoke these words:

> I am the way and the truth and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me (John 14:6).


> Why is Jesus the only one who can save us? Well, the Savior must be perfect man as well as perfect God, and Jesus had to be a perfect man in order to stand in our place, in order to be our sacrifice, in order to be our substitute. And Jesus is the only one who could fulfill that role. And, of course, this is prepared for over redemptive history when God appointed the Lion of David … to be the Messiah of God, to be the Anointed One. And Jesus is the great King to come after David, and Jesus holds this office, and so the whole Old Testament prepares us for the coming of Jesus. So, Jesus is the only one who meets the criteria for saving his people completely from sin. 
> 
> —	Dr. John M. Frame

Jesus is the savior of Presbyterians, and Baptists, and Anglicans, and Methodists, and Lutherans, and Roman Catholics, and Eastern Orthodox, and those in every other denomination of the visible church. There is only one invisible church because everyone who is saved is united to the same Christ, the same Savior. He is the source of our unity. And because he himself is undivided, so are we.
A second idea related to the fact that the invisible church is catholic or universal is that there is only one true religion that can lead us to Christ.


#### One Religion
	
It’s important to realize that Christianity is not primarily a system of salvation, but a covenant relationship with God. That is to say, unlike other religions, Christianity is not fundamentally a method for obtaining salvation. Instead, it’s a relationship between God and his people. Yes, faith is critical as a means to putting us in a right relationship with God. But the big question is: What is your identity as you stand before God? Are you a faithful citizen in God’s kingdom? When God looks at you, does he see someone that is hidden in the covenant blood of Christ? Or are you a citizen of the kingdom of his enemies? Are you one who stands before God on your own merit, who must therefore pay the penalty for your own sin? 
Sadly, those in false religions are members of enemy kingdoms. They are not part of God’s covenant people, and therefore they do not and cannot belong to Christ. Only Christianity can give us access to the savior. This is why biblical Christianity denies the possibility that people can be saved through other religions, even if those people or religions appear to have good intentions.

> As we know, there are many non-Christian religions, what are sometimes called the “great religions of the world” because of their size and because of their influence. And it’s often asked if a person who is not a Christian, but they are faithfully involved in one of these other great religions of the world, they are devoted followers of the doctrines and of the practices of that particular religion, if they are sincere in their practice, will they go to heaven even though they do not acknowledge Christ — maybe they’ve never even heard of Christ. Well, the Bible is clear on that. In John 14:6, Jesus was explicit in dealing with this particular situation. He said of himself, “I am the way; I am the truth; I am the life,” and if that were not clear enough he goes on to say, “And no one comes to the father, but through me.” 
> 
> —	Dr. Donald S. Whitney


> Because of God’s common grace we see all sorts of goodness in people’s lives regardless of what religion they hold to. But we also see great evil in people’s lives, and if we recognize the holiness of God and the falleness of human beings, we realize that coming before God and having a relationship with him requires much more than merely ethical behavior. We can never do anything pleasing to God in our sinful condition. And so, we need a Redeemer and a Savior, not just religious practice. And Jesus is the only one who provides that way to establish a relationship with God again. 
> 
> —	Dr. K. Erik Thoennes

As we have said, the living members of the invisible church are ordinarily contained within the visible church. For this reason, many theologians have made the point that salvation is not ordinarily possible for those outside the visible church. That is to say, if a person is not part of the visible church, that person has no ordinary opportunity to be saved. 
The early church father Cyprian, who lived from A.D. 200 to 258, put it this way in his treatise On the Unity of the Church:

> Whoever is separated from the Church and is joined to an adulteress, is separated from the promises of the Church; nor can he who forsakes the Church of Christ attain to the rewards of Christ. He is a stranger; he is profane; he is an enemy. He can no longer have God for his Father, who has not the Church for his mother.

Here, Cyprian was arguing against those who had left the visible church. And his point was that you cannot enter the invisible church to receive the rewards of Christ unless you are also part of the visible church. This argument is consistent with what we have said about the visible church being in covenant with God. 
The fact of the matter is that salvation itself is a blessing of God’s covenant. We see this in Jeremiah 31:31-34, Luke 1:69-75, Romans 11:27, Hebrews 7:22-25, and many other places. As just one example, listen to Jesus’ words in Luke 22:20, as he instituted the Lord’s Supper:

> This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for you (Luke 22:20).

On the night of his arrest, Jesus said that the blood he would shed in atonement for our sins would be a covenant. In other words, salvation in Christ’s blood comes only through his covenant.
Since God’s covenant is made with the visible church, salvation ordinarily comes through the visible church. This happens when people within the visible church come to faith, or when the visible church gains converts through evangelism. Of course, sometimes people also get saved apart from any interaction with the church. But when this happens, it’s important to recognize that something unusual is taking place — something extraordinary. 
Because the invisible church is universal, only those who are faithful to God’s covenant can be saved. There is no hope that people in other religions will make it to heaven by being good by the standards of their own religions. We must evangelize. We must tell people about the only Savior. We must bring them into the only covenant community, the earthly kingdom of God, and teach them to love and obey its Lord and King. The catholicity of the invisible church is a great encouragement to all of us who are saved — it is our solidarity in Christ. But it’s also a terrible warning to everyone who has not yet come to Christ.
So far in our lesson on the church, we have looked at the divine sanction of the church, and we have seen that the church is both holy and catholic, or universal. At this point, we are ready to turn to our last major topic: the idea that the church is a communion of saints.
