## COMMUNION

In our discussion of the word “holy,” we saw that the term “saints” refers in a general way to everyone that is in the visible church, and in a special way to everyone that is in the invisible church. So, as we discuss the communion of saints, we’ll focus our attention on the term that we have not yet investigated, namely communion.
In ancient Greek versions of the Apostles’ Creed, the word for communion is koinonia (κοινωνία). Scripture commonly uses this word to refer to the fellowship that exists between members of the church, especially through their union with God. We see this in passages like Acts 2:42, 2 Corinthians 13:14, and 1 John 1:3. 
The New Testament also uses koinonia (κοινωνία) to refer to sharing, often of materials goods and money. We see this in Romans 15:16, 2 Corinthians 9:13, and Hebrews 13:16. It is also used to describe the sharing of the gospel — not primarily in evangelism, but in a mutual way within the church, as in Philippians 1:5 and Philemon verse 6.
In line with these ideas, the word “communion” in the creed has traditionally been taken to refer to the fellowship between members of the church; to the sharing of things we possess in common; and by implication, to our mutual dependence on those who share with us. 
As we explore the communion of saints, we’ll organize our discussion around a distinction that should be familiar by now. First, we’ll look at the communion that exists within the visible church. And second, we’ll consider the communion that exists within the invisible church. Let’s begin with the communion of saints in the visible church.


### VISIBLE CHURCH

While there are many aspects to the communion that exists in the visible church, we’ll focus on just three: first, the means of grace; second, spiritual gifts; and third, material goods. Let’s start by looking at the means of grace.


#### Means of Grace

Means of grace are tools or mechanisms that God ordinarily uses to apply grace to his people. John Wesley, one of the founders of the Methodist Church, described the means of grace in a way that reflects the beliefs of many Christian traditions. Listen to what he wrote in his Sermon number 16, based on the text of Malachi 3:7:

> By “means of grace” I understand outward signs, words, or actions, ordained of God, and appointed for this end, to be the ordinary channels whereby he might convey to men, preventing, justifying, or sanctifying grace. 
> 
> 
> The means of grace, which some people refer to as spiritual disciplines or works of piety, depending on the tradition that you come from, when I hear that phase, “How do they work?” The thing that I always want to say is, “They don’t work. It is God who works; it is the grace of God that is at work.” But, the means of grace provide us with the opportunities to receive and process that grace. They create the time and the space to pay attention to the grace of God at work in our lives. I like to think of them as pipelines. We don’t want to confuse the pipe with the water. It’s the water of life that we want to receive. But it’s the pipelines that help carry that water to us. So that we can drink of that water, the means of grace enable us to drink of water of life. 
> 
> —	Dr. Steve Harper

Practically speaking, there are many means God uses to apply grace to us, including such things as adversity and suffering, faith, charity, and fellowship itself. But traditionally, theologians have focused especially on three particular means of grace: the Word of God, the sacraments of baptism and the Lord’s Supper, and prayer. All three of these means of grace belong to the visible church as a whole, including both its believers and its unbelievers.
The Westminster Shorter Catechism, a traditional Protestant summary of Christian teaching, describes the means of grace in this way in its question and answer number 88:

> Q: What are the outward means whereby Christ communicateth to us the benefits of redemption? 
> 
> A: The outward and ordinary means whereby Christ communicateth to us the benefits of redemption, are his ordinances, especially the word, sacraments, and prayer; all which are made effectual to the elect for salvation.

Scripture talks about the benefits of these means of grace in places like Romans 10:14, 1 Corinthians 10:17, and 1 Peter 3:12, 21.
Now, even though the benefits of redemption are only for those who are saved, that is, only for the invisible church, the ordinances themselves are for the entire visible church. Remember, the invisible church is just that: invisible. We don’t know who’s in it. It doesn’t hold its own worship services. It doesn’t have its own ministers. It doesn’t have its own church government. Those things are appointed to the visible church. In the same way, all our means of grace — our preaching, baptisms, celebrations of the Lord’s Supper, and prayers — can be observed by others. They are visible. They are things that the visible church shares in common, and therefore they are part of the communion of the visible church. 
The means of grace have always been important ordinances through which God ordinarily applies the blessings of redemption to our lives, and we should take full advantage of them. We should preach the gospel that converts, and teach the word that brings wisdom and maturity. We should celebrate the sacraments that visibly present the gospel and seal us in God’s covenant. And we should pray for God’s grace and forgiveness, for conversions and maturity, for help to resist sin, for protection from evil, and for rescue in our times of need. In all these ways and more, the means of grace are valuable ministries of the visible church.
Besides the means of grace, the visible church also possesses spiritual gifts in common.


#### Spiritual Gifts
	
Now, it’s important to understand that when we say spiritual gifts belong to the entire visible church, we are not saying that everyone in the visible church is indwelled by the Holy Spirit. They are not. Only believers are indwelled by the Holy Spirit. Even so, the Holy Spirit uses all spiritual gifts for the purpose of building up the visible church. For some people, this means increasing their sanctification and growing toward maturity. For others, it means bringing them to faith first. But in all cases, everyone in the visible church is exposed to spiritual gifts, and even allowed to participate in them in some measure. And because of this, it is right to say that spiritual gifs are shared by the entire visible church.
That spiritual gifts are shared by the entire visible church is demonstrated in several ways. First, they are used in public worship services. We see this explicitly in 1 Corinthians 14:13-26. Second, the gifts are given to build up the entire church. We see this in places like 1 Corinthians 12:4-7 and Ephesians 4:3-13. Third, Paul specifically said that tongues are a sign even for unbelievers within the church, as we read in 1 Corinthians 14:21, 22. Fourth, unbelievers within the church are condemned for failing to benefit from spiritual gifts in Hebrews 6:4-6. In these ways, Scripture makes it clear that believers and unbelievers alike share and partake in the spiritual gifts of the church.
Like the means of grace, spiritual gifts are a great benefit to the modern visible church. They are useful for proclaiming the truth and converting the lost. They are useful for helping believers grow in faith and maturity. And many gifts, such as mercy and hospitality, are useful for meeting the earthly needs of God’s people. Whenever the Holy Spirit grants gifts to his people, we should encourage them to use those gifts for the benefit of all, and not to withhold them from anyone in the visible church.
Communion also exists in the visible church in the way that members share their material goods with each other.


#### Material Goods
	
Part of the meaning of communion, or koinonia (κοινωνία), in the Bible and early church was that Christians shared their material goods with others in the visible church who were in need. The word koinonia (κοινωνία) was often used to refer to contributions for the poor, as in Romans 15:26, 2 Corinthians 8:4 and 9:13, and Hebrews 13:16.
Even when the word koinonia (κοινωνία) is not used, this aspect of communion can be seen in the practice of early Christians. For example, many early Christians sold their possessions and gave the proceeds to the church, as we see in Acts 2:44-45, and 4:34-35. In the early church, some heroic Christians even sold themselves into slavery in order to free others or to raise money to feed the poor.
The early church father Clement, who lived from A.D. 30 to 100, wrote about this practice in a letter commonly known as 1 Clement, which he wrote to the Corinthians. Listen to these words from chapter 55 of that letter:

> We know many among ourselves who have given themselves up to bonds, in order that they might ransom others. Many, too, have surrendered themselves to slavery, that with the price which they received for themselves, they might provide food for others. 

The sense of communion was so strong in the early church, and believers considered others so much more highly than themselves, that they were not only willing to share their possessions, but even to sacrifice their freedom for the sake of giving to others. Paul’s words in 2 Corinthians 8:3-5 help explain their thinking. Listen to what he wrote there: 

> They gave as much as they were able, and even beyond their ability… [T]hey urgently pleaded with us for the privilege of sharing in this service to the saints… [T]hey gave themselves first to the Lord and then to us in keeping with God’s will (2 Corinthians 8:3-5).

In this passage, Paul described the generosity of the Macedonian churches. And he explained that it was their dedication to the Lord that led them to be so sacrificial in their sharing with the Lord’s visible church.
Sharing material goods with those in need is an important part of the life of the visible church. The entire church is God’s people, his covenant community. He cares for everyone in it, and he calls us to do the same. To put it plainly, all we have belongs to the Lord. He has only made us stewards of his property. And that means that our charity and giving are the Lord’s ministry to his people, and his witness of the gospel to the world. So, if we want to be faithful to him, we must not withhold the Lord’s property from his people who need it.
Now that we have explored the communion of the saints in the visible church, we are ready to consider the communion that the invisible church shares.
