### INVISIBLE CHURCH
	
 We’ll look at two main ideas related to the communion of saints in the invisible church. First, we’ll talk about the union that all believers share with Christ. And second, we’ll speak of the union we share with other believers in the invisible church. Let’s begin by looking at our union with Christ.


#### Union with Christ
	
The New Testament frequently mentions that believers are united with Christ. This idea is most commonly presented by saying that believers are “in Christ,” or “in Jesus” or “in him.” On the one hand, this union means that Jesus represents believers before the Father, especially in his death and resurrection. But on the other hand, it means that believers are mystically united to Jesus in a vital way. Jesus dwells in believers, and they dwell in him.

> I think one of the central teachings in the apostle Paul in particular is that we’re united with Jesus Christ; that we belong to him. When we look at all of Biblical revelation, I think the Bible teaches that we are either in Adam or we’re in Christ. Of course, Adam was the first human being. All human beings are born as sons and daughters of Adam. And therefore, they come into the world as sinners. They have a sin nature. They are alienated from God. What it means to be saved and redeemed and to trust in Christ is to be incorporated into Christ, to belong to Christ. What it means to be united with Christ is to be part of his person. 
> 
> —	Dr. Thomas R. Schreiner


> It is in union with Christ that we receive all the benefits of Christ. Historically we understand these benefits to be: justification, sanctification, adoption — all of the things that we describe in terms of what we receive in Salvation. They are only received in Christ. And therefore, it is important for us, it is essential for us, to be united with Christ to receive these benefits. And how do we receive these benefits, or how are we united to Christ? We are united by faith, and faith alone. It is faith that brings us into union with Christ, that gift of faith that comes from God. 
> 
> —	Dr. Jeffrey K. Jue

Theologians often speak of this vital union between Jesus and believers as mystical because the Bible doesn’t explain exactly how it works. But Scripture does make it clear that this union involves both our bodies and our spirits. We see this in John 15:4-7; Romans 8:9-11; and many other places. As just one example, listen to Paul’s words in 1 Corinthians 6:15-17:

> Do you not know that your bodies are members of Christ himself? … He who unites himself with the Lord is one with him in spirit (1 Corinthians 6:15-17).

Charles Spurgeon, the famous Baptist preacher who lived from 1834 to 1892, spoke of our union with Christ in his sermon The Matchless Mystery, based on Ephesians 5:30. Listen to what he said:

> A vital union exists between us and Christ… It is not unity; it is identity. It is more than being joined to; it is being made a part of, and an essential part of the whole… Christ … must have his people; they are essential to him.

It is amazing to think that our union with Christ is so vital that Christ himself would be at a loss if we were taken from him. He loves us, and died so that we could be his prize, his inheritance. Because we are united to him, every believer should feel great security in our salvation, great assurance of pardon, and great encouragement of our right standing before God. We should draw strength from this union, being nourished by Christ and sustained by his Spirit. And we should feel boldness in our fellowship with God, knowing that because we are hidden in Christ, we are perfect in the eyes of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. This does not mean they will not discipline us for our sins. But it does mean that when they do, it will be a work of love, intended to bring us to a maturity and perfection fit to be united to God forever. 
Now that we have looked at believers’ union with Christ, we are ready to look at our union with other believers in Christ.


#### Union with Believers
	
Because every person in the invisible church is united to Christ, believers are also united to one another in him. We see this in Romans 12:5, Galatians 3:26-28, Ephesians 4:25, and a number of other places. Listen to the way Jesus spoke to the Father about this communion in John 17:22-23:

> I have given them the glory that you gave me, that they may be one as we are one: I in them and you in me. May they be brought to complete unity to let the world know that you sent me and have loved them even as you have loved me (John 17:22-23).

Whereas our union with the visible church is relational and experiential, our union with the invisible church is spiritual and ontological. Our very beings are knit together through Christ and his Spirit. As a result, we all have equal dignity in Christ, as Paul taught in 2 Corinthians 5:14-16, Galatians 3:28, and Colossians 3:11. And we even experience each other’s joys and pains, as we read in 1 Corinthians 12:26. 
And the communion of the invisible church is not limited to the church on earth; it also extends to the church in heaven, to those believers who have already died and gone to be with the Lord. Just as believers on earth have a mystical communion with each other in and through Christ, we have the same communion with everyone who is united to Christ — including the believers who are now in heaven. Scripture teaches this idea in places like Hebrews 11:4 and 12:22-24. 
One striking image Scripture uses to teach this fact is the portrayal of the church as the bride of Christ. There is a sense in which the visible church is treated as the bride of Christ, but this is always with a view toward the perfection of the bride in the invisible church. We see this in the Old Testament in Isaiah 54:5-8, Hosea 2:19-20, and Ephesians 5:26-27. And the fulfillment of these images appears in the perfected invisible church in Revelation 19.
Listen to the account of John’s vision in Revelation 19:6-8:

> Then I heard what sounded like a great multitude, like the roar of rushing waters and like loud peals of thunder, shouting: “Hallelujah! For our Lord God Almighty reigns. Let us rejoice and be glad and give him glory! For the wedding of the Lamb has come, and his bride has made herself ready. Fine linen, bright and clean, was given her to wear.” (Fine linen stands for the righteous acts of the saints.) (Revelation 19:6-8).

Here we see that the bride of Christ consists of all the redeemed saints of all ages, in communion with each other. We all stand as one, wearing one wedding gown composed of the righteous acts of every believer.
Scripture draws many applications from the fact that believers are united to each other in Christ. It teaches us that every believer is valuable and even indispensible to Christ. It teaches us to honor each other, and to minister to each other. It teaches us to be compassionate toward each other, to be kind, to be gentle and patient, and to forgive. It teaches us to treat others the same way we want them to treat us, and the same way we treat ourselves. Because in our union with them through Christ, they are just as much a part of us as our own bodies are.
