# Old Testament Foundations – Module Four – A World of Violence
## Discussion Questions 

1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	Describe the threatening events that Moses recorded in Genesis 6:1-8. How did God react to these events?


3.	What does the literary structure of Genesis 4:1-6:8 reveal about Moses’ purpose in writing?


4.	What connections did Moses draw between violence and hope in the primeval history and in his contemporary world?


5.	How did Moses want the Israelites who followed him to respond to the connections between their world and the primeval world?


6.	What does Genesis 6:3 tell you about the longsuffering nature of God toward the sinfulness of mankind?


7.	In what ways does our world today seem similar to the world in the time of Genesis 4-6?


8.	What is our hope today for deliverance from violence and evil?


9.	Can you identify any “Nephilim” in your life?  What are they?  How can you overcome fear of them and gain victory over them?


10.	How do the New Testament teachings and promises encourage you to endure suffering?


11.	Describe the deliverance at the consummation of the kingdom. How does it make you feel that at the consummation of the kingdom our deliverance will be full and final?
 
REVIEW STATEMENT on ORIGINAL MEANING - IMPLICATIONS: Violence not only entered the world as a result of the fall, but also serves as a judgement on sinners. Everyone deserves the violence of hell.

CASE STUDY: Roy lived in a nice neighborhood in the United States. There was very little violence in his neighborhood. He couldn't understand why people in other places of the world had so much violence. While he never really said this out loud, he came to think of himself as a better person than those who lived in violent areas.
## Reflection Questions 
1.	Evaluate Roy’s conclusion and attitude in the previous case study with your learning community. 
2.	Some places in the world are more violence than others. What is the most violent place you can think of? Why? Discuss this with your learning community until you come to some conclusions.  
3.	It’s only God’s common grace — often expressed through his church — that keeps every place in the world from being more violence than it is. How do people in your church feel about this violence? What is your church doing to alleviate violence in your neighborhood or town? Discuss this with the leaders of your church. What could be done further? 
4.	People who don’t live in extremely violent places often take for granted this relative peace. People have come to view their safety as a right. When the tower fell on and killed 18 people in Jesus’ day, he told people not to be surprised as if they were more sinful than others. Rather, they should be surprised that so few people were experiencing violence. We should not be surprised at the violence in the world. Rather, we should be surprised at God’s common grace that makes some places less violent than others. We should be surprised that we are still alive. Discuss this in your learning community.  
## Action Assignments
•	If you live in a relatively low-violence area, ask 10 people from your church to write down the 15 things they are most thankful for. See if any of them mentions the relative freedom from violence. 
•	Develop and preach a sermon on Luke 13:1-5.
