Study Guide 
Old Testament Foundations
Module Three – Paradise Lost and Found

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for this course’s final exam.

**********************************

OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 – 13:47

Introduction 

I. Literary Structure 

      A. Overview 

  	1. In Garden 

  	2. Condition Enhanced 

  	3. Condition Cursed 

  	4. Out of Garden 

      B. Symmetry 

  	1. Beginning and Ending 

  	2. Middle Portions 


REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. Indicate the way Dr. Pratt divides Genesis 2:4-3:24 and give the titles. Explain the main content of each section.

2. Explain the contrasts between the first and last of the four sections (Genesis 2.4-17 / Genesis 3.22-24).

3. Explain the contrasts between the two middle portions of this passage (Genesis 2.18-25 / Genesis 3.1-21).


 
OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 13:47 – 43:57

II. Original Meaning 

      A. Garden 

  	1. Identity 

  	2. Holiness 

      B. Loyalty 

  	1. In Eden 

  	2. In Canaan 

      C. Consequences 

  	1. Death 

  	2. Pain 

 	3. Exclusion 


REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. According to Dr. Pratt, where was Eden? Explain why he comes to that conclusion, and explain other common views.

2. What does "Edin" mean in Babylonian language?

3. What does "Eden" mean in Hebrew?

4. Explain the parallels between Eden and the Tabernacle.

5. Explain the parallels between what God expected of Adam and Eve in Eden and what God expected of Israel in Canaan. 

6. What were the consequences of disloyalty to God, both in Eden and in Israel?


 
OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 43:57 – 1:01:56

III. Modern Application 

      A. Inauguration 

  	1. Paul 

  	2. Matthew 

      B. Continuation 

  	1. Paul 

  	2. James 

      C. Consummation 

  	1. Romans 

  	2. Revelation 

Conclusion 


REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. Explain the parallel that Paul makes between Adam and Christ in Romans 5.

2. Explain the parallels between the temptation of Christ in the wilderness and the temptation of Israel in the wilderness.

3. How does Paul use the example of Eve to exhort Christians in 2 Corinthians 11:3?

4. Explain the parallels between James 1:12-15 and the story of Eden.

5. Explain the parallels between Romans 16:20 and Genesis 3:15.

6. Explain the parallels between the Garden of Eden and the eternal paradise, according to Revelation 2:7 and 22:1-2.

7. How does Dr. Pratt express Moses' intention in relating the story of the disobedience of Adam in the Garden of Eden?

