# Old Testament Foundations – Module Five – The Right Direction
## Discussion Questions 

1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	Describe the connections between the flood of Noah’s day and the experience of Israel in Moses’ day. What implications did Moses intend his audience to draw from these connections?


3.	What did Moses want his audience to learn from the account of Noah’s sons in Genesis 9:18-10:32?


4.	How does the continuation of the kingdom correspond to the themes Moses emphasized in Genesis 6:9-11:9?


5.	Summarize the modern application of Genesis 6:9-11:9 in light of the inauguration, continuation and consummation of the kingdom.


6.	What does the sacrament of baptism mean to you? What role does it play in our salvation?


7.	The theme of deliverance can be traced through Noah’s flood, the Israelite’s journey to the Promised Land and the inauguration of the kingdom. In what ways has God delivered you? How the theme of God’s deliverance provide hope for you and the world today? 


8.	Moses wrote these chapters to motivate the Israelites to move forward in battle. How can we apply this same motivation to spiritual warfare? What other battles has God placed before you? 


9.	How were the people of Babel confused about the ways of God? Give an example of how modern Christians depend on their own efforts and security instead of relying God.


10.	In what ways do modern people scoff and doubt Christ’s return? How does remembering Noah’s flood remind us of Christ’s forthcoming cataclysmic intervention?
 
REVIEW STATEMENT on MODERN APPLICATION - INAUGURATION: Through his death and resurrection, Jesus defeated the evil powers. On the other hand, the evil one still goes about like a roaring lion looking for someone to devour. Although this evil beast has been defeated, he has not yet been brought to his knees. That will happen at the second coming of Christ. One of the main consequences of this defeat through Jesus' death and resurrection is that now the evil one cannot keep the gospel from going to everyone everywhere.

CASE STUDY: There was once a young missionary in Chile who had a fear of sharing the gospel. He simply hadn't had much experience doing it. Seminary had not prepared him for this. He did share the gospel, but with fear of what people would think, or that he might say the wrong things. The Lord, providentially, forced him into situations in which he had to share the gospel. As he gained experience in talking with unbelievers, it became something he actually looked forward to. Now it's one of his favorite things to do.
## Reflection Questions 	
1.	When was the last time you told an unbeliever about the good news of Jesus Christ? Describe what you said and how the person responded. Share this with your group and have them share as well. 
2.	Talk about the state of evangelism in your culture and your church. Jesus’ defeat of this evil powers should give us confidence to take the initiative to tell the good news to those unbelievers the Lord has placed in our path. How is that happening? Is there anything that can be done to improve this process? 
3.	Jesus’ defeat of the evil powers should also encourage us to develop new relationships with unbelievers. How many unbelievers do you know fairly well? How many unbelievers have you gotten to know over the last six months? Jesus sought out those who constantly strayed from God or did not know God at all, because they needed the most help. If we don’t know unbelievers, we can’t tell them the good news very easily. 
## Action Assignments
•	Make a commitment to get to know these three unbelievers in the next month. Befriend them. Show genuine interest in them. Pray for a good opportunity to share the gospel with them in a way that would be natural. 

