# The Primeval History 
### Lesson Two
### Paradise Lost & Found

## INTRODUCTION
I suppose that at one time or another everybody loses something. Maybe it’s a book. Maybe it’s the key to your home. I don’t know about you, but when I lose something like that the first thing I do is retrace my steps. At least in my mind, I go backwards in time step-by-step to remember where I put the thing I lost. Then, once I retrace my steps, I carefully reverse what I did wrong. I put the keys on the table where they are supposed to be, and the book goes back on the shelf. Retracing and reversing what I did is one of the best ways I know to find something I’ve lost.
Now, we have entitled this lesson, “Paradise Lost and Found,” and we will focus our attention on Genesis 2:4–3:24, the story of Adam and Eve’s sin in the Garden of Eden. We will see that Moses wrote about Adam and Eve losing paradise to encourage Israel to retrace and reverse the steps Adam and Eve took in that Garden of Eden. Only as Israel learned from this story could they hope to find paradise again, and we will see that the encouragement Moses gave to Israel is also God’s message for us today. By going back to the steps of Adam and Eve, Christians today can find paradise too.
Our examination of Genesis 2 and 3 will divide into three parts: First, we will examine the literary structure of this passage. Second, we will focus on the original meaning of these chapters to discern why Moses wrote them as he did for the children of Israel. And third, we will draw attention to modern application by asking how the New Testament guides us toward the proper use of  this passage in our lives. Let’s begin with the literary structure of our passage.

## LITERARY STRUCTURE
Although Genesis 2–3 is a rather long passage and touches many topics, it actually forms a unified narrative. To understand this passage properly, we need to focus on these two chapters as one literary unit. Our examination of the literary structure in Genesis 2–3 will have two main concerns: first, we will gain an overview of the major sections of the passage; and second, we will comment on some of the significant symmetries among these various sections so that we may grasp the heart of what Moses was saying to Israel. Let’s begin with an overview of the literary structure of Genesis 2– 3.

### OVERVIEW
Apart from the brief title that appears in the first half of 2:4, these two chapters divide into four major sections, and these four major sections are indicated primarily by changes in topics and characters. We should walk through these four steps and summarize their basic content.

#### In Garden
The first dramatic step of our story appears in 2:4-17, where we read that God put Adam in the Garden of Eden. These verses begin with a panoramic view of the Garden of Eden, and as the passage tells us, the whole garden was Adam’s splendid place to dwell and to work. Then the concerns of this section narrow down to the creation of Adam and his commission to work within the garden. Adam was given a great privilege by God’s grace. He was to keep the garden on God’s behalf.

#### Condition Enhanced
The second step of our narrative consists of 2:18-25, which we will designate humanity’s “condition enhanced.” In this material God added even greater blessings to Adam’s life. This section begins by introducing a new problem which is noted in 2:18. There, God looked at Adam and said these words:

>  It is not good for the man to be alone. I will make a helper suitable for him (Genesis 2:18).

The rest of 2:18-25 reports how God dealt with this problem. Adam searched for a partner among the animals, but in the end, God formed a woman and brought her to Adam. In this way, God greatly enhanced the wonderful creation that he had made already for Adam and Eve.

#### Condition Cursed
The third step of our narrative is 3:1-21, which we will call humanity’s “condition cursed.” This material begins in 3:1 with the introduction of a new topic and character, the tempting serpent. From this point forward, 3:1-21 deals with the serpent’s temptation and the results of his temptation. Eve falls prey to the serpent’s temptation so that she and Adam eat from the forbidden fruit and fall under divine curses.

#### Out of Garden
The fourth element in the overarching structure of this passage is 3:22-24 which we have entitled humanity “out of the garden.” This section is marked by another significant shift in topic. We find God speaking about the problem of the Tree of Life. In 3:22 we read these words:

>  The man ... must not be allowed to reach out his hand and take also from the tree of life and eat, and live forever (Genesis 3:22).
>  
To deal with the potential problem of Adam eating from this tree, God drove Adam from the garden and placed cherubim and a flaming sword to guard the entrance to Eden. From that point on, human beings would no longer have access to the Garden of Eden apart from a direct intervention by God.

### SYMMETRY
With the four major divisions of this passage in mind, we may now look more closely at Genesis 2–3 to see the dramatic symmetry that this passage displays. By juxtaposing different elements in these sections, Moses revealed the central concerns of his narrative. To explore the symmetries of this narrative, we will look first at the balance which exists between the beginning and ending of our narrative, and then we will look at the symmetry of the two middle portions of the story. Let’s look first at the beginning and ending of this passage.

#### Beginning and Ending
As we will see, Genesis 2:4-17 and 3:22-24 stand in sharp contrast with each other in at least three important ways.
The first contrast is in location. The account begins in 2:7 with God placing Adam within the paradise garden. Adam lived and worked in a place full of divine blessings; wonderful vegetation, life-giving water, precious metals and stones surrounded him on every side. By contrast, the narrative ends in 3:24 with God expelling Adam and Eve from the garden. This geographical contrast makes it clear that the most desirable place for human beings to be on earth was in the Garden of Eden.
A second difference in the focus in each section is on the special trees of the garden. Although 2:4-17 mentions two trees, the Tree of Life and the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, by the time we come to 2:17 attention moves just to the one tree, the Tree of Knowledge. This tree held the power to give human beings the experiential knowledge of goodness and sin. It could open their eyes to see things they had not seen before.
By contrast, at the end of the narrative in 3:22-24, God was no longer concerned with the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, but exclusively with the Tree of Life. This tree had the power to give human beings eternal life. But God banished Adam and denied access to this tree. This contrast made it clear that free access humanity once had to the garden, and all of the blessings that were there, had been lost until God decreed otherwise.
A third difference between the beginning and ending of our narrative is in humanity’s commission. In 2:15 the first step reports that God commissioned Adam to blessed work in the garden with no pain and no difficulty. In 3:23, however, God banished Adam and Eve from the garden and condemned them to difficult toil outside of the garden. This contrast also provides an essential perspective on the story. Not only did humanity lose the wonder of life in Eden, we were also condemned to difficulty so long as we remained away from the garden.
These three contrasts between the opening and closing sections of Genesis 2–3 draw our attention to some of the most vital aspects of this narrative. Moses wrote about a major shift in the human condition that took place in primeval times. God originally ordained that human beings should dwell in his garden, but Adam and Eve’s sin bound them to difficulty and trouble, and separated them from the tree that gives eternal life. Now, as we will see, this set of contrasts spoke directly to the situation in which the Israelites found themselves as Moses led them toward the Promised Land. The Israelites had been far from Eden as they suffered under the cruelty of slavery in Egypt. They needed to regain the blessings which God provided in Eden.

#### Middle Portions
With the contrasting symmetries of the outer portions of the story in mind, we should turn our attention to the middle portions of the story, 2:18-25 and 3:1-21. These two inner steps fill in the gap between the beginning and ending and they form their own set of contrasting symmetries in at least three ways.
One contrast focuses on humanity’s relationship with God. In the second step we see a harmonious relationship between Adam and God. In 2:18 God expressed concern for Adam and brought Adam a perfect partner in Eve. The picture here is that of God and the human race in intimacy and at peace. Yet, in the third portion of the narrative, disharmony replaces the initial harmony between God and the human race. Adam and Eve disobeyed God’s command, and in 3:8 they hid from God’s approach, and God spoke angrily against Adam and Eve.
A second contrast exists in human relationships. In the second step of 2:18-25, Adam and Eve were in perfect bliss. In 2:23 Adam broke forth with the first love poem in the Bible, saying that Eve was “bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh,” and they lived together naked and without shame. By contrast, however, in 3:16 God pronounced a curse on this relationship, declaring that strife would persist between the man and woman. The woman would desire her husband, and he would rule over her. These words revealed that the sin of Adam and Eve not only disrupted their relationship with God, but with each other as well. And from that point forward, human relationships have been characterized by difficulty and struggle.
A third contrast appears in humanity’s relationship with evil. In the second step, evil is absent from the story. Adam and Eve were entirely innocent and separated from the power of evil. But by the third section, humanity had fallen prey to the serpent and was locked into a long-term struggle with evil. In 3:15 God promised that Eve’s seed would one day overcome the serpent, but no immediate victory was offered to Adam and Eve.
These contrasts between the second and third portions of the narrative help us see a number of concerns which Moses had as he wrote this narrative. Moses wrote about Adam and Eve in ways that connected to Israel’s experience. Sin continued to wreak havoc in Israel’s life. It damaged the peoples’ relationship with God and with each other, and more than this, every day of hardship they endured reminded Moses and Israel that, just like Adam and Eve, they had to wait for the time when God would finally give victory over evil to his people.
With the literary structure of this material in mind, we are able to delve into the original meaning of this passage. Why did Moses write this account of humanity’s expulsion from God’s garden? What message was he conveying to the nation of Israel as he led them toward the Promised Land?

## ORIGINAL MEANING
Now, to be sure, on a very basic level, Moses wrote this narrative to teach some general theological themes to the Israelites whom he led. He told them a lot about the origin, and the nature, and the results of sin in the world. And these were very important themes. Yet, as we saw in the previous lesson, Moses did not write his primeval history simply to inform Israel about such general historical and theological issues. Instead, like many other ancient writers, Moses wrote his primeval history to give his people practical instruction about current religious and social programs, mainly, in this case, leaving Egypt and going to Canaan.
To see how Moses connected the primeval Garden of Eden and Israel’s conquest of Canaan, we will look at three elements of his story: first, Moses’ portrait of the Garden of Eden; second, his focus on the requirement of loyalty from Adam and Eve; and third, his depiction of the curses placed on Adam and Eve. Let’s look first at Moses’ description of the Garden of Eden.

### GARDEN
Moses’ description of the garden is so complex that many of our modern questions about Eden will always remain unanswered. Yet, it is possible for us to grasp the central concerns in Moses’ presentation. As we will see, Moses described the Garden of Eden in ways that identified Eden with the Promised Land. From Moses’ perspective, the land to which he was leading Israel in his day was actually the location of the primeval land called Eden.
Many aspects of Genesis 2–3 make it clear that Moses wanted Israel to connect Canaan with the land of Eden, but two features of his account are particularly important: first, the identity of Eden; and second, the holiness of Eden. Let’s look first at the identity of Eden.


Identity
In Genesis 2:10-14 we read these words:

> A river watering the garden flowed from Eden; from there it was separated into four headwaters. The name of the first is the Pishon; it winds through the entire land of Havilah, where there is gold... The name of the second river is the Gihon; it winds through the entire land of Cush. The name of the third river is the Tigris; it runs along
the east side of Asshur. And the fourth river is the Euphrates (Genesis 2:10-14).

Moses wrote that a single river flowed from Eden and divided into four headwaters. These headwaters were the Pishon, the Gihon, the Tigris, and Euphrates Rivers. One central river in Eden fed into these four rivers. It was their central source.
Now, as we explore Moses’ description here, we must always remember that many geographical changes have taken place throughout our planet’s history since the beginning of the world. Even in Moses’ day there was no longer a single river which fed these four headwaters. The Scriptures teach that this central source of water will appear only in the end of time. Yet, Moses’ reference to the four rivers which were fed by this central source gives us an approximate picture of where he believed Eden had been located.
We can identify the Tigris and Euphrates mentioned in 2:14 with the region of the modern day Tigris and Euphrates Rivers. The fact that Genesis refers to these rivers has suggested to most modern interpreters that Genesis agrees with Babylonian mythology, that Eden was in the region of Mesopotamia. In the Babylonian language, edin means “a plain,” or “open flatland,” a term well suited for the lower Tigris-Euphrates region. In Hebrew, however, eden does not mean “a plain”. It means “a pleasant or delightful place.” So, Moses was not using the Babylonian word at all. He used a Hebrew word that sounded like the Babylonian word for Eden, but his concept of this place was not the same. In fact, the account of Genesis explicitly states that Eden was not limited to Mesopotamia. As we saw in Genesis 2:10, the Tigris and Euphrates flowed from a greater river which was located in Eden. We read in verse 10:

> A river watering the garden flowed from Eden; from there it was separated into four headwaters (Genesis 2:10).

This passage teaches that the river of Eden fed the Tigris and Euphrates, not that Eden was limited to the Tigris-Euphrates region. Moses mentioned the Tigris and Euphrates to provide a general orientation toward the eastern most extent of Eden. The great rivers in the east marked the eastern boundary region of Eden.
This outlook is confirmed by the locations of the other rivers mentioned in Genesis 2. In 2:11, 13 Moses mentioned another pair of rivers. He wrote that the river of Eden fed the Pishon, which winds through the Havilah, and it also fed the Gihon, which winds through the entire land of Cush. In the Old Testament, the lands of Havilah and Cush are often associated with the region of Egypt. We cannot be sure precisely how Moses understood these rivers in relation to the great river Nile, but it is safe to say that he pointed to the region of northern Egypt as the western border of Eden.
So we can see, in Moses’ outlook, Eden was no small place. It was a large area extending from the Tigris-Euphrates to the border of Egypt — nearly all of the region that we now call the Fertile Crescent. Within this pleasant place was a special garden, the Garden of Eden, the centerpiece of the large territory of Eden.
At first, Moses’ identification of Eden with the Fertile Crescent may not seem very important. But in reality, it is critical to understanding the significance of Eden for Israel as Moses wrote the book of Genesis. Elsewhere in the book of Genesis, Moses referred back to Genesis 2 to teach Israel that the land of Eden, the Fertile Crescent, was the land God promised to Israel, the land to which he was taking them. This perspective became especially clear when God spoke to Abraham in Genesis 15:18. Listen to the way God described the borders of the Promised Land in this passage:

> On that day the Lord made a covenant with Abram and said, “To your descendants I give this land, from the river of Egypt to the great river, the Euphrates” (Genesis 15:18).

We see here on the one hand that God promised Abraham that his land would extend to the Tigris-Euphrates region, and it would also reach to “the river of Egypt.” Many interpreters have suggested that “the river of Egypt” may refer not to the Nile itself, but to a smaller river in the Sinai border region of Egypt. In all events, it is evident that this verse alludes to the geographical boundaries of Eden as they appear in Genesis 2. This allusion to Genesis 2 makes it clear that Moses believed God had promised Abraham and his descendants the land that was once known as the land of Eden. From Moses’ point of view, as Israel moved toward Canaan, they actually moved toward the location of the primeval land of Eden.
In order to highlight the importance of Israel going to Eden, Moses stressed the holy character of that place. He pointed to the holiness of Eden to teach Israel that the Promised Land to which he was leading them was the place where they could receive the blessing of entering into the special presence of God.

#### Holiness
The primary way in which Moses conveyed the holiness of Eden was to describe it in terms that he also used to describe the tabernacle. Although God is omnipresent, and lives in every place in a general sense, Moses built a tabernacle where God came in a special way to meet with his people, and at this tabernacle God would display his presence, give his law, receive the worship of his people and bless them with his favor. So, when Moses depicted the Garden of Eden in terms which he also used to describe the tabernacle, he revealed that Eden, and thus Canaan, was the place of God’s special presence on earth. There, Israel could receive the great blessings of God.
At least seven aspects of Eden indicate that it was a holy place of God’s special presence, much like the tabernacle. First, in 3:8 Moses used a special expression when he said that God “was walking in the garden.” The Hebrew expression translated “walking” is mit halek (ִמ ְת ַהלךְ ). This terminology is significant because it is one of the special ways in which Moses described God’s presence at the tabernacle in Leviticus 26:12 and other passages.
Second, in 2:9 we read about the Tree of Life as a central feature of the Garden of Eden. This sacramental tree held the power to give eternal life to those who ate from it. And although the Bible does not say this explicitly, recent archaeological research has noted that many sites in the ancient world had stylized images of the Tree of Life in sacred places. This evidence strongly suggests that the menorah, the seven-pronged lampstand of Moses’ tabernacle, was most likely a stylized representation of the Tree of Life. In this way, the Garden of Eden is shown to be the original holy place on earth.
A third way in which Moses noted the holiness of Eden was his focus on gold and onyx in the region. In 2:12 we learn that gold and onyx were bountiful in the region of Eden. As we might expect, Exodus 25–40 mention gold and onyx as important parts of the tabernacle construction.
A fourth connection between the Garden of Eden and the tabernacle is the presence of cherubim or angels. According to 3:24, God placed cherubim in the Garden of Eden to guard against access to the Tree of Life. In a similar way, cherubim appear throughout the decorations of the tabernacle in passages such as Exodus 25:18 and 37:9. These cherubim reminded Israel not only of the angels in heaven, but also the angels guarding the holy place in Eden.
Fifth, we read in 3:24 that the entrance of Eden was “in the east,” that is, on the eastern side. This fact may seem insignificant until we realize that according to Exodus 27:13 and a number of other passages, the main entrance for the tabernacle was also on the eastern side. This was the case with most temples in the Ancient Near East. Once again, Eden is shown to be a holy dwelling of God.
Sixth, Moses spoke of Adam’s service in Eden with language that he used elsewhere for Levitical service in the tabernacle. In 2:15 Moses described Adam’s responsibility in the garden in this way:

> [God] put him in the Garden of Eden to work it and take care of it (Genesis 2:15).

These terms also appear together in Numbers 3:7-8 and 8:26. There, Moses described the work of the Levites in the tabernacle using the same expressions. Adam and Eve served as priests in the Garden of Eden.
Seventh, it is significant that the formation of the Garden of Eden took place after the six days of creation. As we saw in the preceding lesson, the six days of creation climaxed in God’s Sabbath observance in Genesis 2:1-3. Interestingly enough, according to Exodus 24:16 and following, Moses spent six days on the mountain with God, and God gave him the instructions to build the tabernacle on the seventh day.
These seven features of Eden show that Moses considered the Garden of Eden to be a holy place much like the tabernacle. It was the location of God’s special presence in the world. And to be near that place was to near the blessings of God.
As we have already seen, Moses believed that Canaan was the location of Eden. As a result, in focusing on the holy character of Eden, Moses was also drawing attention to the holy character of Canaan. To be near Canaan was to be near the place God ordained from the beginning as his holy dwelling. One of the best passages for seeing Moses’ teaching about this future holy place is Deuteronomy 12:10-11. There he wrote these words:

> You will cross the Jordan and settle in the land the Lord your God is giving you as an inheritance, and he will give you rest from all your enemies around you so that you will live in safety. Then to the place the Lord your God will choose as a dwelling for his Name — there you are to bring everything I command you: your burnt offerings and sacrifices, your tithes and special gifts, and all the choice possessions you have vowed to the Lord (Deuteronomy 12:10-11).

This passage reveals one of the central features of Moses’ vision of the land of Canaan. He emphasized that one day Canaan would be the location of the permanent dwelling for the presence of God — the temple for Yahweh.
To be sure, the land of Canaan in Moses’ day was a mere shadow of what Eden had originally been. Even when Solomon built the temple in Jerusalem, the Promised Land was still not entirely redeemed from sin nor restored to its original perfection. Yet, as Moses wrote about the holiness of Eden, he held before the Israelites the vision of what their land could be one day. To reach the Promised Land was to move into the vicinity of Eden, the place of God’s holy presence on earth. Just as God placed Adam and Eve in the wonderful temple garden in the beginning, God was now bringing Israel to Canaan, and once they dwelled in that land, the nation would begin to experience the blessings of living in the special presence of God.
Now that we have seen how Moses set forth Adam and Eve’s blessings in Eden as a prototype of the grace that awaited Israel in the Promised Land, we are in a position to look at a second topic in Genesis 2–3: God’s test of Adam and Eve’s loyalty. This motif plays a crucial role in Moses’ presentation.
