#### Paul
Paul summarized his viewpoint succinctly in Romans 5:14. There he wrote:

> Death reigned from the time of Adam to the time of Moses, even over those who did not sin by breaking a command, as did Adam, who was a pattern of the one to come (Romans 5:14).

Notice that Paul said Adam was a type of one to come. The rest of Romans 5 makes it clear that “the one to come” was Christ. Listen to the way Paul summarized the matter in Romans 5:18-19:

> Just as the result of one trespass was condemnation for all men, so also the result of one act of righteousness was justification that brings life for all men. For just as through the disobedience of the one man the many were made sinners, so also through the obedience of the one man the many will be made righteous (Romans 5:18-19).

Notice how Paul put it here. Adam’s one trespass resulted in condemnation for all people, but Christ’s one act of righteousness resulted in justification for all men. Why was this so? Because the disobedience of the one man, Adam, made us sinners. But the obedience of the one man, Christ, made us righteous.
This teaching is familiar to most Christians. As Moses taught in Genesis 2–3, Adam was just one man, but his actions had consequences for all who are identified with him. Adam’s sin brought death to the entire human race because he was our federal or covenant representative before God. As a result of Adam’s sin, we are all born outside the paradise of God’s blessing and under the curse of death. But at the same time, the New Testament teaches Christ is the federal or covenant representative of everyone who has faith in him. In contrast with Adam’s disobedience, however, Christ’s obedience to God brings righteousness and life to all who are counted in him.
From this teaching we learn something very important about applying the story of Adam’s sin to our lives. The only way for paradise lost to be found again is through the righteous obedience of Christ. We cannot enter the paradise of salvation as individuals standing on our own merits before God. We need an absolutely perfect representative to enter paradise before us, and Christ is that representative. We find the salvation of eternal life in God’s presence only because Christ was fully obedient to the Father. In his earthly ministry, Jesus earned the right to enter into paradise, and only those who place their faith in him may enter along with him.
Paul’s correlation between Adam and Christ was shared by other New Testament writers as well. Let’s consider how this theme appears in the gospel of Matthew.

#### Matthew
Matthew in particular drew attention to the way Christ retraced and reversed Adam’s sin in his account of Christ’s temptation in Matthew 4:1-11 (the parallel passage of which is found in Luke 4:1-13).
In a number of different ways, the story of Christ’s temptation parallels both the experience of Adam and Eve in the garden, and the challenge Moses brought to the Israelites as he wrote about Adam and Eve. In the first place, the location of Christ’s temptation connects it with Israel as the Israelites followed Moses. According to Matthew 4:1, Jesus was led by the Spirit into the desert, just as God had led Israel into the desert. It was in the wilderness that God tested Israel to see if she would be obedient, and Christ was tested in the wilderness also.
Second, the length of time Jesus spent in the wilderness paralleled the experience of Israel. Just as Israel was in the wilderness for forty years, according to Matthew 4:2, Christ was in the wilderness for forty days.
Third, hunger was an important feature in Christ’s temptation. In Matthew 4:3 Satan tempted Christ to turn the stones into bread. This dimension of Christ’s temptation paralleled the testing of Israel over water and food in the wilderness.
Fourth, Jesus himself connected his experience with Israel’s testing in the wilderness in the ways that he used the Scriptures. In Matthew 4:4 Jesus quoted Deuteronomy 8:3. In Matthew 4:7 he quoted Deuteronomy 6:16, and in Matthew 4:10 he referred to Deuteronomy 6:13. These Old Testament passages come from portions of Deuteronomy where Moses described Israel’s test in the wilderness. By quoting these passages, Jesus directly connected his experience of temptation with that of the testing of the nation of Israel.
So we see that Matthew’s account of the temptation of Jesus connects to the message which Moses originally gave to Israel through Genesis 2–3. Through his active obedience, Jesus succeeded where Adam and Israel both failed. Christ was faithful to the commands of God. This is why Jesus said those well-known words found in Luke 23:43.
Just as Israel faced her trials in the wilderness to prepare her for entry into the paradise of Canaan, Luke 23:43 records that on the cross Jesus told the repentant thief these words:

> I tell you the truth, today you will be with me in paradise (Luke 23:43).

Christ’s reward for his righteousness was eternal life in paradise.
So we see that the New Testament relates the temptation of Adam and Eve, as
well as the testing of Israel in the wilderness to the inauguration of the kingdom in Christ’s earthly ministry. Christ was the last Adam who succeeded where the first Adam failed. Moreover, Christ overcame temptation in the wilderness, reversing Israel’s failure. And for this reason, he entered eternal paradise.
Now that we have seen how the New Testament relates Moses’ account of Adam and Eve in the garden to the first coming of Christ, we should move to our second concern: How does the New Testament apply these principles to the continuation of the kingdom, the time in which we now live?

### CONTINUATION
Several passages in the New Testament stand out in this regard. But we will look at only two: first, Paul’s focus on these chapters of Genesis, and second, the way James wrote about these issues.

#### Paul
Let’s look first at Paul’s words in 2 Corinthians 11:3:

> But I am afraid that just as Eve was deceived by the serpent’s cunning, your minds may somehow be led astray from your sincere and pure devotion to Christ (2 Corinthians 11:3).

As Paul continued in this chapter, he explained that he was deeply concerned that the Corinthians would turn to another gospel. We see here that Paul appealed to Eve’s negative example to warn against the worst kind of disloyalty — turning from the true gospel of Christ. Just as Moses used the story of Eve’s temptation to warn Israel to move faithfully toward the Promised Land, Paul used the same story to warn believers in his day about the basic loyalty required of all who follow Christ. During the continuation of the kingdom, many people in the visible church face the danger of turning away from essential truths of the gospel. The church must guard against this rank apostasy because the consequences are as horrible as they were for Adam and Eve.

#### James
James took a posture similar to Paul’s as he explained the role of testing and trials in the Christian life. In James 1:12-15 we read these words:

> Blessed is the man who perseveres under trial, because when he has stood the test, he will receive the crown of life that God has promised to those who love him... each one is tempted when, by his own evil desire, he is dragged away and enticed. Then, after desire has conceived, it gives birth to sin; and sin, when it is full-grown, gives birth to death (James 1:12-15).

It is clear that James alluded to Genesis 2–3. In 1:14 he focused on human “desire” as the power behind enticement to sin, and it was Eve’s desire for the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil that caused her to sin.
Second, James explained that those who pass the test will “receive the crown of life.” By contrast the result of sin is that it “gives birth to death.” The contrast here between life and death parallels the contrast between life and death in the story of Adam and Eve.
Just as Moses encouraged faithfulness in Israel during the trials in the wilderness by appealing to the temptation of Adam and Eve, Paul and James encouraged us to fidelity during the trials of the continuation of the kingdom. Tests during the Christian life reveal our true character and prepare us for eternal life. By God’s grace, we must do all we can to remain faithful to Christ so that we may be honored with the gift of eternal life in paradise.
Having seen how the New Testament applies the story of Adam and Eve in the Garden to the inauguration and continuation of the kingdom, we should turn our attention to the final stage, the consummation of salvation in Christ at his second coming.

### CONSUMMATION
This theme also appears many places in the New Testament, but we will touch on only two passages: one in Romans and another in the book of Revelation.

#### Romans
In the first place, listen to the way Paul gave hope to the believers in Rome as he closed his epistle to them. In Romans 16:20 he wrote these words:

>  The God of peace will soon crush Satan under your feet. The grace of our Lord Jesus be with you (Romans 16:20).

In these words, Paul reminded the Roman Christians of their great hope in the second coming of Christ. But he did so by referring back to the promise of salvation in Genesis 3.
As we have seen earlier in this lesson, in Genesis 3:15 God told the serpent that one day Eve’s seed, the human race, would crush the head of the seed of the serpent. In this passage Paul said that Satan will be crushed under the feet of Christians when Christ returns. Christ himself will destroy Satan and our powerful enemy, death. Then we will reign with Christ in victory and glory.

#### Revelation
Another place in the New Testament where the themes of Genesis 2–3 are related to the consummation of the kingdom is the book of Revelation. John referred to the Tree of Life on a number of occasions in this book. Listen to the way John put the matter in Revelation 2:7:

>  He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches. To him who overcomes, I will give the right to eat from the tree of life, which is in the paradise of God (Revelation 2:7).

The allusion to Genesis 3 here is obvious. We know that Adam and Eve were expelled from the Garden of Eden precisely to keep them from eating of the Tree of Life. Yet, when Christ returns, God will give his people the right to eat from the Tree of Life. Notice also where this tree is located. John explicitly said that it is “in the paradise of God.” Just as Moses called Israel to enter Canaan because long life could be found there, Christians have as their hope entering an even greater, more fully restored paradise.
In the third place, we see another connection with Genesis in the identification of those who will eat from the tree. John said that the right will be given “to him who overcomes.” Just as Moses spoke of the Tree of Life to encourage Israel to be faithful to God, John explained that only the one who overcomes sin by remaining loyal will be able to eat from the Tree of Life.
Finally, we should look at Revelation 22:1-2. As John looked ahead to the new world, this is what he saw:

> Then the angel showed me the river of the water of life, as clear as crystal, flowing from the throne of God and of the Lamb down the
middle of the great street of the city. On each side of the river stood the tree of life, bearing twelve crops of fruit, yielding its fruit every month. And the leaves of the tree are for the healing of the nations (Revelation 22:1-2).

The perspective of the New Testament is plain. When Christ returns to consummate his kingdom, those who trust Christ will enter the paradise of Eden. Satan will be crushed under our feet and we will eat from the Tree of Life and live forever in God’s new creation.

## CONCLUSION
We have seen in this lesson that Moses wrote about Adam and Eve in the garden to help the Israelites as they moved toward the Promised Land. He called the nation to retrace and to reverse the events in the Garden of Eden. In many respects, the message of this passage is very similar for us today. By hearing Moses’ call to Israel to move forward toward the Promised Land, we can see how we too must retrace and reverse the steps of Adam and Eve. By trusting and remaining faithful to Christ, we will discover the salvation of paradise, lost and found

Dr. Richard L. Pratt, Jr. (Host) is Co-Founder and President of Third Millennium Ministries. He served as Professor of Old Testament at Reformed Theological Seminary for more than 20 years and was chair of the Old Testament department. An ordained minister, Dr. Pratt travels extensively to evangelize and teach. He studied at Westminster Theological Seminary, received his M.Div. from Union Theological Seminary, and earned his Th.D. in Old Testament Studies from Harvard University. Dr. Pratt is the general editor of the NIV Spirit of the Reformation Study Bible and a translator for the New Living Translation. He has also authored numerous articles and books, including Pray with Your Eyes Open, Every Thought Captive, Designed for Dignity, He Gave Us Stories, Commentary on 1 & 2 Chronicles and Commentary on 1 & 2 Corinthians.
