# Study Guide 
# Theological Foundations
# Module Seven – What is Theology?

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for the final exam of the Theological Foundations course.
.
**********************************

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 – 38:00


Introduction

I. Definitions 

	A. Typical Definitions

    		1. Thomas Aquinas 

    		2. Charles Hodge

    		3. William Ames 

    		4. John Frame 

	B. Tendencies 

    		1. Academic Orientation 

    		2. Life Orientation

	C. Evaluations 

    		1. Academic Orientation 

    		2. Life Orientation 


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. What does Romans 1 suggests about doing theology?

2. Briefly state the four definitions of "theology" provided by Aquinas, Hodge, Ames and Frame. 

3. Explain the linguistic origin of the word "theology."

4. Describe the two tendencies or orientations most people have when approaching the study of theology. 

5. Contrast the relative strengths and weaknesses an academic orientation and a life orientation. 
