# Study Guide 
# Theological Foundations
# Module Four - The Holy Spirit

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for the final exam of the Theological Foundations course.
.
**********************************

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 – 28:19

Introduction 

I. Divinity

      A. Apostles’ Creed

  	1. Structure

  	2. Jesus’ Conception 

      B. Biblical Basis 

  	1. Names 

  	2. Attributes 

  	3. Work 

  	4. Formulas 


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. According to the lesson, which creed clarified more completely the divinity of the Holy Spirit?

2. According to the lesson, the Apostles’ Creed implies the divinity of the Holy Spirit in two ways. What are they? 

3. How did Hippolytus (A.D. 170 – 236) describe early baptismal ceremonies? What does it teach us about their belief in the Trinity?

4. Mention the categories of biblical evidence of the divinity of the Holy Spirit that are used in the lesson, and give examples of each.

5. Mention the "incommunicable" attributes of God that the Holy Spirit possesses. 

6. Make sure you are familiar with the contents of the following Bible passages:

  1 Corinthians 2:11
  Acts 5:3-4
  Psalm 139:7-10
  2 Peter 1:20-21
  Matthew 28:19
  2 Corinthians 13:14
