
# New Testament Foundations – Module Six – The Background of Acts
## Discussion Questions

1.	What did you like in the lesson or was the most significant thing you learned? What questions did you have?


2.	How does the authorship of Luke help us better understand and apply the book of Acts?


3.	What are some similarities and differences between unbelieving Jews and Christians today? How can understanding the similarities and differences help us evangelize modern Jews?


4.	How should the Old Testament’s view of world history inform our own thinking as Christians in the modern world?


5.	How are our lives and theology influenced by our own governments and cultures? How can we discern whether this influence is good or bad?


6.	As you look at most churches around your city today, what kind of people belong to them? What kinds of social and ethnic backgrounds are represented?


7.	What can we learn from the early church about relating to the social and political influences around us?


8.	As you look at the problems the early church was facing, as described in Acts, which of those problems do you think are still the most common in our churches today?


9.	In what ways do you currently participate in God’s kingdom? What is our role in the process of kingdom building?


10.	Is there anything you can learn from the person and life of Luke that is a good example for you?


11.	How should we change our thinking and priorities in light of the fact that God’s kingdom expands as people receive and trust in Jesus as the Messiah? 

REVIEW STATEMENT: The kingdom came in Jesus, but not the way John the Baptist expected. When from prison he asked Jesus about it, part of Jesus’ answer was, “blessed is the one who is not offended by me” (Matthew 11:6). What Jesus meant was this: You are blessed if you are willing to use your gifts to serve while constantly being overlooked, misunderstood, maligned, disdained, unrecognized, dismissed, criticized, marginalized, laughed at and even put to death (as in the case of John the Baptist). Those who are not offended when this happens because they are overwhelmed with the glory of Jesus and what he is doing to bring his kingdom in the midst of our weakness are truly blessed.

CASE STUDY: Satan assumed that when people serve God it’s because of the blessings they receive from God. He said, “Take away Job’s blessing, and he will curse you.” Job’s wife knew he was a man of integrity, so her husband’s suffering made no sense to her. Her perspective was, “If you serve God and are not blessed, life is meaningless.” She advised Job to curse God and die. Job’s friends tried to make sense of his suffering by assuming that Job had sinned. Their assumption was that if you serve God properly, you will always have good circumstances. Since Job had bad circumstances, they assumed he must have sinned. But Job was not aware of any unconfessed sin and didn’t accept that as an answer. While Job was greatly disturbed by this dilemma—he was suffering and yet was not aware of any unconfessed sin on his part—he kept trusting God. In the end, God told Job’s friends that Job would offer a sacrifice for their sin because they had not said what was right about God as Job had. 

## REFLECTION QUESTIONS:

1.	Read Jeremiah 45:1-5 where we see Baruch’s complaint that God’s judgment on Judah is getting in his way of being somebody important.  
2.	Read and reflect on Psalm 131:1-3. Can you identify with having “calmed and quieted my soul like a weaned child with its mother”?
3.	Do you know anyone who has struggled with their Christian faith—or even left the Christian faith—because they were “offended” by Christ allowing them to suffer or not have the blessings or good circumstances or feelings they expected? If so, how did you feel about that person and their struggles and/or actions? Share this with your learning community.
4.	Have you ever been “offended” by Christ because of the struggles he has allowed you to go through? If so, describe what happened, your reactions and the outcome.
5.	How have such experiences tempted you to give up? Give an example.
6.	How have such experiences helped you grow in your faith? Give an example.
7.	How clear is it to you now that your reward is coming in the future—in the new heavens and earth—and not now? Give examples that illustrate your answer.

## Action Assignments:
1.	Keep track this week of the times you use your gifts to serve others. Make a note each time of whether or not you received some reward for it—like recognition or thanks.
2.	Ask five Christians: “How do you feel when you serve others and your service is not appreciated or rewarded with recognition? How does that affect the use of your gifts to serve?”  Prepare and give a 5-minute talk on serving others--without recognition if necessary.
