## CHRISTIAN TRADITIONS

It’s only natural for Protestants to be suspicious of Christian tradition. We see ourselves as deeply rooted in the Reformation, and the Protestant Reformers reaffirmed the authority of Scripture over all human traditions. Still, not all human traditions contradict the Scriptures. And, as we’re about to see, the Scriptures themselves teach that when Christian traditions represent wisdom that the Holy Spirit has given the church, there is much value in them. So, what place do theological traditions have as we build a Christian theology? 
To answer this question, we’ll touch on three topics. First, we’ll define the term “theological tradition.” Second, we’ll examine some of the tendencies of theological traditions. And third, we’ll investigate the importance of theological traditions in our lives. Let’s look first at what we mean when we speak of a Christian theological tradition.


### DEFINING TRADITION

Evangelical Christians employ the term “tradition” in so many ways that we need to specify how we’ll use it here. We’ll clarify the issue first by providing a negative definition — explaining what we don’t mean — and then by offering a positive definition — stating what we do mean. In the first place, in many evangelical circles today the term “tradition” has very negative connotations because it is closely associated with what we’ll call “traditionalism.”


#### Negative Definition

As American theologian John Frame put it: 

**“Traditionalism” exists where sola Scriptura is violated.** 

In other words, traditionalism bases theological beliefs on human preferences, usually longstanding traditional preferences, rather than on the Scriptures. In Mark 7:8-13, Jesus said these words to the scribes, Pharisees and Sadducees: 

> You leave the commandment of God and hold to the tradition of men… making void the word of God by your tradition that you have handed down (Mark 7:8-13). 

Followers of Christ should reject traditionalism because it gives to mere human opinion the authority that rightly belongs only to Scripture. Since human folly rather than divine revelation can easily guide our faith, we should oppose traditionalism in all of its forms, just as Jesus did in his day.

> Well, first of all, tradition is a good aspect, I think, for Christians. It’s where we can get our doctrines summarized for us. But we need to also be careful about the dangers associated with tradition. Some of us know of Mark 7 where Jesus actually rebukes the Pharisees and the teachers of the Law by obeying the traditions of man and actually set aside the things of God… One of the stories that comes to mind is one church I once visited. So, this church was very formal and loved prayer books in the mornings. And there were old people who struggled when the youngsters who were from down the universities coming to church because they felt these young people were actually not respecting the traditions. And the church actually barred them from coming in instead of actually seeing these young people as people who were lost, who were seeking the Lord, and that they could reach out to them. So that’s what can be one of the ways where our traditions can get in the way of the gospel.
> 
> — Dr. Vuyani Sindo 

In the second place, although “traditionalism” has very negative connotations, we should have a different outlook on “tradition.” As strange as it may sound to our modern evangelical ears, the apostle Paul actually affirmed a positive role for tradition in the body of Christ. 


#### Positive Definition

Listen to what Paul wrote to the Corinthians in 1 Corinthians 15:3: 

> For I delivered to you as of first importance what I also received: that Christ died for our sins in accordance with the Scriptures (1 Corinthians 15:3). 

The expression “delivered” in Greek is paradidome (παραδίδωμι) and “received” is paralambano (παραλαμβάνω). These terms appear several times in Paul’s writings to describe his transfer of Christian teachings. This fact is important to our discussion because these were the same terms used in first century Jewish circles to describe the teachings of Jewish traditions.
In effect, Paul viewed Christian faith as a tradition to be passed down from person to person, from generation to generation. Even though we may be using the term “tradition” in ways slightly different from Paul’s use, we need not be put off by the terminology of “Christian tradition” or “Christian traditions.” Clearly, Paul himself employed the language of tradition in a positive way. 

> Scripture itself speaks positively of both oral and written apostolic tradition. As evangelicals, when we say we want to pass on Scripture, we can freely say, we also want to preserve apostolic tradition… So, for instance, when the Protestant Reformers were evaluating church traditions according to Scripture, they felt free to dismiss and set aside those traditions where they didn’t agree with Scripture. But where church tradition agreed with apostolic tradition, in Scripture, the Reformers defended those church traditions. 
> 
> — Dr. Andrew Parlee


> There are many benefits to our traditions, what we sometimes call rituals. People need to remember who they are, to constantly remember who God is and what God has done, and many traditions and rituals help us to remember. When you give that place to traditions and rituals and use them merely as a reminder of who God is, what God did, who humanity is, and what humanity’s position is, it helps us to strengthen the faith we have in God. They should never take the place of God; they should never take the place of Jesus and his merits. They are only a reminder; they represent what our relationship with God means and how we develop it, how God allows us to have that relationship with him, and those rituals and traditions help us to remember him. 
> 
> — Rev. Pablo Torres, translation 

For our purposes, we’ll define a theological tradition as: 

**A relatively longstanding theological doctrine, practice or pathos that distinguishes branches of the church from each other.**

Let’s break down this definition into two main parts. First, it’s “a relatively longstanding doctrine, practice or pathos.” That is to say, when we speak of a theological tradition in these lessons, we do not have in mind something that started recently. Rather, a system of beliefs becomes a theological tradition in our terms only when it has existed for quite a while. According to our definition, only beliefs enjoying years of acceptance in the church rightly qualify as traditions.
And second, a theological tradition “distinguishes branches of the church from each other.” In other words, we have in mind those features of particular denominations or associations of believers that are identifying characteristics. What makes a Baptist a Baptist? The Baptist tradition. What makes a Methodist a Methodist? The Methodist tradition. When groups of believers share common outlooks over a long period of time, these outlooks become their distinctive theological paths. They find their hearts are more at home in one branch of the church than another.

> When it comes to Christian traditions or branches of the church and the various things that different branches of the church emphasize and the paths that they have followed over the years, it’s easy to go to extremes. One extreme is to reject any such influence on your life — you emphasize your individual life, your individual walk with Christ and your individual reading of the Bible. And people that overemphasize that extreme end up being a lot like a homeless person. And maybe you’ve seen a homeless person that walks down the street and he’ll notice this, and he’ll pick it up and put it in his bag or in his cart, and he’ll notice something else that was left by the way or another thing left by the way. And so, the bag is just full of things that really don’t fit together, and his life is sort of disintegrating. It has no unity. He has no home to go to. So that’s one extreme, is that heightened individualism, sort of, rejection of Christian traditions or branches of the church and the wisdom that they have. 
> 
> Now, the other extreme is to take tradition, a branch of the church, the paths that various portions of the church have followed for years, to take that more or less like a prison… And you can find long-term traditions that have been handed down from generation to generation and you can lock yourself into them as if you’re in a building without any windows at all; no door to get out of. Why do you do this? Why do you believe that? Why do you feel this way? “Well, it’s because that’s what my church tells me to believe and to feel and to do.” And that’s like making a Christian tradition as if it were a prison. And we don’t want tradition to be either the extreme of rejection, where you are an individual that has no home, and you also don’t want to make a branch of the church your prison either, because there’s so much to be learned from other branches of the church other than the one that you may identify with. 
> 
> So, I often think of a denomination, or a branch of the church, or the paths that they have followed for years — a tradition, a Christian tradition — as a home. Now, you know what a home is like. It’s the place you go to sleep. It’s the place you go and feel comfortable. It’s where you are. You do certain things inside your home in ways that may be different from what other people do. But it’s your home… And that’s the way I think it’s very helpful to think about branches of the church, and the rules that they give us, the policies they give us, even their doctrinal summaries, and the ways that they tell us to feel and to behave in our Christian faith. It’s great to have that as your home because we have to depend a lot on the body of Christ to sort of fill in the gaps that are in our lives, to help us think through things more carefully, and to live in ways that are pleasing to God. But at the same time, we can go outside of our branch of the church — our tradition — make friends, learn from them, and come back to our own branch of the church — our own home — and change things in ways that accord more with the Bible.
> 
> — Dr. Richard L. Pratt, Jr. 

Now that we’ve defined what we mean by Christian theological traditions, we should also note some tendencies of theological traditions.
