# Study Guide 
# Biblical Foundations
# Module Two – The Gospel of Matthew

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for this course’s final exam.

**********************************

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 – 35:11

Introduction

I. Background

      A. Author

  	1. Traditional View

  	2. Personal History

      B. Original Audience

  	1. Kingdom of Heaven

  	2. Jewish Customs

      C. Occasion

  	1. Date

  	2. Location

  	3. Purpose


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. What is the teaching of the lesson regarding the authorship of the gospel of Matthew? 

2. Write down the quotes of each of the following authors regarding the authorship of the gospel of Matthew. Make sure you can identify each one.

	Papius (early 2nd century, quoted by Eusebius in 4th century)
	Irenaeus (wrote around AD 180) 
	Tertullian (155-230 AD)

3. Note key details about Matthew.

4. What was Matthew's profession? Note key details about the attitude toward his profession on the part of the Jews in his day.

5. For whom did Matthew especially write his gospel? Was he considering other people as well? Explain.

6. According to the lesson, what is the probable reason that Matthew used the expression "Kingdom of heaven" more frequently than "Kingdom of God"? 

7. Describe the evidence which shows that Matthew expected his readers to be familiar with Jewish customs.

8. According to the lesson, when did Matthew probably write his gospel? What are the arguments?
 
9. What was the unique special purpose of Matthew in writing his gospel? 


