## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 35:11 – 1:46:42

II. Structure and Content

      A. Introduction: The Messianic King

      B. The Gospel of the Kingdom

      C. The Spread of the Kingdom

      D. Signs and Parables

      E. Faith and Greatness

      F. Present Opposition and Future Victory

      G. Culmination of Jesus' Ministry


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. According to the lesson, how do most scholars divide the Gospel of Matthew into sections? What is their guideline? 

2. Name the five main sections of Matthew, as given in the lesson.

3. Besides the five major sections of the gospel, what does Matthew include? 

4. According to the lesson, what is the purpose of Matthew's genealogy of Jesus? 

5. How does the lesson answer those who think that the genealogy of Jesus does not prove anything about Jesus' legal claims, since He was not really born of a human father? 

6. The five main divisions of the Gospel of Matthew each include two parts. What are these two parts? 

7. How does the lesson explain the meaning of Matthew 4:17, "Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is near"? 

8. As the kingdom of heaven began to spread because of Jesus' miracles, how did most people react? 

9. What was the theme of most of Jesus' parables? 

10. What was the only case in the Gospel of Matthew where someone firmly believed in Jesus?

11. What is the main point of Jesus' Olivet Discourse about the second coming? 

 
## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 1:46:42 – 2:23:36

III. Major Themes

      A. Old Testament Heritage

  	1. Quotations and Allusions

  	2. Kingdom of Heaven

  	3. Messianic King

  	4. Unbelieving Jewish Leaders

  	5. Humility and Gentleness

      B. People of God

  	1. Church

  	2. Family of God

  	3. Calling

Conclusion


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. What two major themes of the Gospel of Matthew are highlighted in this lesson?

2. How does Matthew highlight the Old Testament heritage of the gospel?

3. The lesson expresses the fact that Jesus was "Israel _________." 

4. What does Matthew quote more than any other gospel writer?

5. What name does Matthew use for Jesus more frequently than the other gospels?

6. How does the lesson interpret Jesus' comments, "You have heard that it was said,..." and "But I say unto you..."? Is He nullifying the Old Testament law?

7. In what ways does Matthew speak of the people of God?

8. What is the Hebrew word for "assembly"? Make sure you can pronounce it and write the transliteration.

9. What is the Greek word for "assembly"? Make sure you can pronounce it and write the transliteration.

10. What kind of terminology does Matthew use frequently to speak of God's people and their relationship with Him? Give examples.

11. What is the emphasis in Matthew regarding the calling of Jesus' disciples?

