# Study Guide 
# Theological Foundations
# Module Eight – Exploring Christian Theology

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for the final exam of the Theological Foundations course.
.
**********************************

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 – 33:14


Introduction 

I. Christian Theology 

	A. Problems with Definitions 

	B. Working Definition 

	C. Unity and Diversity 

  		1. Unified Theology 
  
  		2. Multiple Theologies 


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. Why can it be hard to define "Christian theology"?

2. Briefly explain the difference between Hinduism and Christianity.

3. What does the lesson mention about the theology of cults such as Jehovah’s Witnesses, Mormonism, Christian Science, and the faith of Sun Myung Moon? 

4. Why should we be satisfied with a working definition that accords with the Apostle’s Creed?

5. What does John 17:22-23 teach about the importance of the unity of believers?

6. Should believers seek theological unity?

7. What accounts for the diversity within the body of Christ?

8. Make sure you are familiar the contents of the following Bible passages, especially their teaching about the unity of believers:

Ephesians 4:4-5
Ephesians 4:15
1 Timothy 4:16

9. What world religion is closest to Christianity?

10. As we survey Christian theology, why is it important to maintain a balanced perspective regarding theological unity and diversity?
 
