## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 33:14 - 1:00:45

II. Christian Traditions 

	A. Defining Tradition 

  		1. Negative Definition 

  		2. Positive Definition 

	B. Tendencies of Traditions 

  		1. Orthodoxy 

  		2. Orthopraxis

  		3. Orthopathos

	C. Importance of Traditions 

  		1. Awareness of Ourselves 

  		2. Awareness of Others 


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. How does Dr. John Frame describe “traditionalism”?

2. How does the lesson define “tradition”? 

3. Describe the three tendencies that theological traditions tend to follow. What does each emphasize?

4. What is the danger involved in each of these tendencies? What problem can each lead to?

5. What does the lesson suggest as an alternative to pretending to separate ourselves from our theological heritage? 

6. According to our lesson, where do students of theology get the idea that they must divorce themselves from their particular religious tradition or heritage before they can study theology? 

7. What example is given in the lesson of how Paul sometimes speaks of traditions in a positive way? 
 
## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 1:00:45 – 1:32:02


III. Reformed Tradition 

	A. Origins and Developments 

	B. Tendencies 

	C. Distinctives 

  		1. Five Solas 

  		2. Unity of Scripture 

  		3. Doctrine of God 

  		4. Human Culture 

Conclusion 



## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. Give a brief historical sketch of the development of Reformed theology, highlighting significant historical events.

2. What is the theological tendency of the Reformed tradition?

3.  In Reformed churches, which of the three areas tends to be most neglected: orthodoxy, orthopraxis, or orthopathos?

4. Name and identify the five "Solas" of the Reformed tradition.

5. Summarize the distinctive emphasis of the Reformed tradition in the area of the doctrine of God.

6. Explain the traditional reformed view of the unity of Scripture, as well as the view of those who differ with this view.

7. Explain the lesson's view of whether the Old Testament and the New Testament are essentially different in the way they present the law, the gospel, and the way of salvation.

8. Note the geographical location where each of the following theologians focused his ministry: Luther, Zwingli, Calvin.

9. Mention the earliest theological documents of the Reformation.

10. Explain the circumstances that brought about the Synod of Dort, and give the result of this series of meetings.

11. Name Richard Niebuhr’s five views of the relationship between Christ and culture, give a brief description of each, and identify which one is emphasized in the Reformed tradition.

12. What is the "cultural mandate"?


