
### Discussion Topics:

1.	What does discipleship look like in your country?

2.	What are the key pieces that go into the discipleship of someone else?

3.	How do people change as they grow in their walk with Christ?

4.	What models from scripture can we use to think through what discipleship should look like? 

5.	What does discipleship currently look like in your church? Draw a picture/diagram that shows the discipleship process.

6.	Make a list of five Scripture passages that center on discipleship.

7.	What areas of life should be considered in developing a discipleship program?

8.	What were the commandments that was Jesus talking about in John 15?

9.	How is discipleship about character formation or cultivating the Fruit of the Spirit?

10.	How many people can/should you disciple at a time?

11.	What place should the Bible have in discipleship (read, study, memorize, etc.)?

12.	What place should prayer have in discipleship?

13.	What is the connection between discipleship and leadership development in your church?

14.	What qualifies someone to start discipling someone else? How do you know when you have discipled someone as long as you should?

15.	How do you both “tell” and “show” in the discipleship process?

16.	How will you equip your disciple to disciple others and not just be discipled?

17.	What stirs your affections and devotion to Jesus, and how can you incorporate that into your discipleship of others?

18.	What strengthens/lessens the hold of sin on your life?

19.	What practices or disciplines have been most helpful in your pursuit of Christ?

### Call to Action:

1.	Give a report on all that the Lord has done in your life to shape you over the past year. And, give a report on all that you hope He does in you over the next year.

2.	Give a report on all your church is doing to disciple its people. In the final discussion group time, present a discipleship plan for your church or ministry area based on your group discussions.

3.	Begin discipling another believer.

### Badge Criteria:

This badge shall be awarded by the trainer upon successful completion of the call to action by the student in a manner that is faithfully consistent with the badge components and in light of the topics discussed throughout the course. 
