# Study Guide 
# Biblical Foundations
# Module Seven – The Book of Acts, Structure and Content

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for this course’s final exam.

**********************************

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 – 30:52

I. Rhetorical Strategy

      A. Stated Purpose

  	1. Historical Account

 	2. Gospel Message 

      B. Reliance on Authority 

  	1. Words 

 	2. Deeds 

      C. Structural Pattern 

  	1. Summary Statements 

  	2. Church Growth 


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. According to Dr. Bayer, what was Luke's purpose in writing Acts?
       
2. Dr. Bayer says that critics have often taught in recent centuries that the historical accounts in the Bible are "___________."
       
3. What argument does Dr. Bayer give to show that Luke intended to write real history?
       
4. Where else do we see the title "the first of the island" used in antiquity besides Acts 28:7?
       
5. Dr. Bayer says that Acts is "a sort of ________ or didactic history."
       
6. According to Dr. Bayer, since Luke was not an apostle, what did he include in Acts to give greater authority to his account?
       
7. In the first century, were writers prone to make inaccurate historical reports of speeches?
       
8. To what degree did Luke edit the speeches he records in Acts?
       
9. What story in Acts 13:7-12 teaches us that Luke appealed to deeds to support the authority of the gospel message in Acts?
       
10. How does Dr. Bayer explain the literary structural pattern of the Book of Acts?
       
11. What is the focus of all the main sections of the Book of Acts, according to Dr. Bayer?
         



 
