## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 30:52 – 52:30

(NOTE: It is not necessary to write down and remember the exact references for each section of Acts as you take notes.)

II. Content

      A. Jerusalem

      B. Judea and Samaria 

      C. Ends of the Earth 

  	1. Phoenicia, Cyprus, and Antioch 

2. Cyprus, Phrygia, and Galatia 

  	3. Asia, Macedonia, and Achaia 

  	4. Rome 


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. What is the order of the main geographical areas as expressed in Acts 1:8 to refer to the expansion of the Church?
       
2. Describe a sign of internal growth in the church at Jerusalem in the first main section of Acts, according to Dr. Bayer?
       
3. What was a sign of the internal tension in the church at Jerusalem in the first main section of Acts, according to Dr. Bayer?
       
4. What was a sign of external growth in Judea and Samaria, in the second main section of Acts, according to Dr. Bayer?
       
5. What was a sign of external opposition in Judea and Samaria, in the second main section of Acts, according to Dr. Bayer?
       
6. What was a sign of internal tension in Antioch of Syria, in the third main section of Acts, according to Dr. Bayer?
       
7. What was a sign of internal growth in Acts 15?
       
8. What reason is given for Paul and Barnabas parting company as they began the second missionary journey?
       
9. What was Paul's position on the Gentiles keeping the laws and traditions of the Jews?
       
10. How free was Paul to preach the gospel while he was in prison in Rome?
       
11. List out the places Paul evangelized on his missionary journeys.

 
## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 52:30 – 1:23:05

III. Modern Application

      A. Literary Character

1. Selective 

2. Episodic 

3. Implicit 

      B. Discontinuities

1. Different Time

2. Different Circumstances 

      C. Continuities 

1. Same God 

2. Same Goal

3. Same Gospel

Conclusion 


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. In what ways was Luke selective in his writing of Acts?
       
2. What does Dr. Bayer mean when he says that Luke's writing in Acts is "episodic"?
       
3. What is the difference between "argumentative" discourse and "narrative" discourse, as Dr. Bayer explains?
       
4. What are the possible signs that would enable us to infer that an example of something narrated in Acts should be followed as a good example?
       
5. Summarize Dr. Bayer's teaching regarding apostles.
       
6. Summarize Dr. Bayer's teaching regarding the outpouring of the Holy Spirit on the Day of Pentecost.
       
7. Summarize Dr. Bayer's view concerning the pattern in Acts of meeting in homes?
       
8. What argument does Dr. Bayer give to show that the account of sharing properties and resources in the early Church is not necessarily normative for us today?

