# Study Guide 
# Theological Foundations
# Module Two - God the Father

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for the final exam of the Theological Foundations course.
.
**********************************

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 – 31:34

Introduction

I. God

       A. Singularity

  	1. Polytheism

  	2. Monotheism

  	3. Christianity

       B. Simplicity

## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. Explain the meaning of the term "singularity" when used in reference to God? 

2. Explain the meaning of polytheism, monotheism, atheism, and henotheism.

3. Explain the teaching of Romans 1:2-23 about how God has revealed Himself to all people. 

4. Explain the basic differences between Christianity, Judaism and Islam, with regard to their understanding of God. 

5. How did Mohammed confuse the Christian view of the Trinity? 

6. How does the Bible sometimes use the name "god," when it is not referring to the one true God?

7. Give the meaning each biblical name of God: El Shaddai, El Elyon, Adonai, and Yahweh.

8. Explain the meaning of the term "simplicity" when used in reference to God. 

9. Make sure you are familiar with the basic contents of the following Bible passages: Romans 1:20-23, 1 Kings 8:60, Luke 10:16, Exodus 3:13-14.
