## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 31:35 - 1:12:38

II. Father Almighty 

       A. Name 

       B. Person 

       C. Fatherhood 

  	1. Creator

  	2. King 

  	3. Family Head 

       D. Power

  	1. Unlimited 

  	2. Matchless 


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. What are the three principle meanings of "father" when the term is used in Scripture in reference to God?

2. What does the lesson teach about when the name "Father" refers to the first person of the Trinity in the Bible? 

3. Explain the difference between "ontological Trinity" and "economic Trinity." 

4. Explain the orthodox theology regarding the relation between the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, both in terms of the "ontological Trinity" and in terms of the "economic Trinity."

5. Why did ancient people often refer to their king as "father"? 

6. Explain the three aspects of the fatherhood of God as taught in the lesson: creator, king, and family head. 

7. In what sense are there some things that God "cannot" do? 

8. Make sure you are familiar with the basic contents of the following passages: John 14:16-17, Hosea 11:1, Jeremiah 10:10-16, and Isaiah 14:24-27.



 
## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 1:12:39 – 1:39:31 

III. Maker

      A. Work of Creation

      B. Goodness of Creation

      C. Authority over Creation 

  	1. Absolute 

  	2. Exclusive 

  	3. Exhaustive 

Conclusion 


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. What does "ex nihilo" mean?

2. What was the view of the church during the first centuries after Christ regarding the "days" of creation, as manifested in the Apostles’ Creed? 

3. Which person or persons of the Trinity were involved in the creation of the world?

4. Explain the view of the lesson regarding whether creation is still good after the Fall. 

5. Write down the quote of John Wesley regarding creation. 

6. Explain the meaning of the following terms used to describe God’s authority over creation: absolute, exclusive, and exhaustive.

7. What mistake do we often make in dividing the areas of our lives, according to the lesson?

8. Make sure you are familiar with the contents of the following passages: Genesis 1:1, Genesis 1:31, Genesis 3:7-19, Romans 8:20-22, 1 Timothy 4:4, Romans 9:20-21.



