# New Testament Foundations – Module 8 – Major Themes of Acts
## Discussion Questions


1.	What did you like in the lesson or was the most significant thing you learned? What questions did you have?


2.	How does the Holy Spirit empower people today to live transformed lives and to evangelize the world? In what ways have you experienced the empowerment of the Holy Spirit?


3.	What is the gift of tongues? Why did God give this gift?


4.	What is your opinion? Did the experiences of Acts 2,8,10 and 19 set a pattern for all believers today? Defend your view.


5.	What should we expect as the normal experience for all believers with regard to the ministry of the Holy Spirit in our lives?


6.	In what way do the apostles still serve as the foundation of the church? Why can’t there ever be another authoritative apostle? Why is this important?


7.	Why do we have to depend on the Spirit’s power in order to be godly and effective witnesses to the gospel message? 


8.	What strategies can you personally use as you witness to the gospel? How might you improve on your witness of the gospel?


9.	How is your church carrying out the mission of expanding the kingdom of God? What can your church do to improve its efforts? In what ways can you personally help your church expand the kingdom of God?


10.	Have you personally experienced any kind of hardship because of your faith? Explain how it happened and how you responded.





REVIEW STATEMENT: The Holy Spirit was given by God as a first installment of the transformation God’s people would experience when the eschatological kingdom came. When God’s people receive the Spirit, we are given supernatural power to speak the truth, use our gifts to serve, and do all for the right reasons—for God’s glory and kingdom. Although our experience of the Spirit is not always as spectacular as that of the apostles, it is just as powerful. God’s power to advance the kingdom is just as effective in us as it was in them. 

CASE STUDY:  Nancy grew up in a Christian home and experienced steady spiritual growth in her life. She had no dramatic testimony to share and sometimes that made her wonder how effective she could be as God’s kingdom agent. Neither was she famous, like a well-known Christian preacher she listened to, or like the popular Christian author whose novels she liked to read. However, as she grew into maturity, she became increasingly effective at using her words to bless, her gifts to serve and her love to encourage God’s people, as well as unbelievers. She never became famous, but when she went to be with the Lord at the age of 90, many people gave testimony at her funeral of how she had impacted their lives. She was not famous, but she had been a very effective kingdom agent because of the power of the Spirit at work in her life.

## REFLECTION QUESTIONS:
a.	When you think about the power of the Spirit, what kinds of things do you typically think about? How do you think most Christians understand what the power of the Spirit looks like in practice?
b.	Do you know anyone like Nancy? Share with your learning community what this person is like.
c.	Do you think a non-famous Christian can be just as effective as a famous one? Give your reasons.
d.	Discuss this with your learning community: Before the flood, the evil one and his demons controlled the whole earth. With the exception of Noah, everyone’s thoughts and actions were only evil all the time. Then God formed a people of his own—Israel—to be a light in the midst of a world controlled by the evil one. Now that the Spirit has been poured out, God’s kingdom is spreading all over the world. The evil one still has some strongholds, but the gates of hell have not been able to prevail against the church.
e.	Without the Holy Spirit, people can only pretend to be good, to love others and to advance the kingdom. 
f.	How often do you pray for the presence and power of the Spirit in your life? Explain your answer. 
g.	What difference does the Spirit make in your life? Give some examples. 


## Ministry Assignments:
a.	Ask five Christians what difference the Holy Spirit has made in their lives. Write a short essay summarizing their experiences (without using their names). Using this essay, reflect on your own experience of the Holy Spirit. 
b.	Read Luke 11:13. Make it a habit to ask the Lord regularly to give you increasing measures of the Holy Spirit in your life.



