## FORGIVENESS
	
To understand what the Apostles’ Creed means by forgiveness, we’ll touch on three closely related issues: first, the problem of sin that makes forgiveness necessary; second, the divine grace that makes forgiveness possible; and third, our individual responsibility, the things we need to do to receive forgiveness. We’ll look first at the problem of sin.


### PROBLEM OF SIN

Christians who believe in the Bible recognize that one of the main reasons Jesus died was to solve the problem created by our sin. Sin separates us from God’s blessings, and places us under his curse. And there is no way that we can overcome this problem by ourselves. This is what we mean when we talk about the problem of sin: Sin condemns us. And apart from Christ, we have no way to save ourselves from its presence or its consequences. 
We’ll investigate what the Scriptures teach about the problem of sin in three parts. First, we’ll offer a biblical definition of sin. Second, we’ll talk about the origin of sin in the human race. And third, we’ll look at the consequences of sin. Let’s start with a definition of sin.


#### Definition of Sin
	
The Bible talks about sin in a variety of ways. It uses words like lawlessness, rebellion, transgression, offense, evil, missing the mark, and a variety of other words to describe things that are sinful. And each of these words adds something to our understanding of sin. 
But when Scripture speaks of sin abstractly — when it offers its own definition for sin — one word tends to rise above the others: lawlessness. In the Bible’s vocabulary, sin is most fundamentally a violation of God’s law. As the apostle John wrote in 1 John 3:4:

> Everyone who sins breaks the law; in fact, sin is lawlessness (1 John 3:4).

We see this same emphasis on sin as lawlessness in places like Romans 7:9-25, and 1 Corinthians 15:56. This basic concept of sin is also reflected in the theology of many different Christian traditions.
As just one example, listen to the Westminster Shorter Catechism’s question and answer number 14. In answer to the question:

**What is sin? **

The Catechism answers:

> Sin is any want of conformity unto, or transgression of, the law of God.

Notice that this answer identifies two general types of violations of God’s law: want of conformity unto the law, and transgression of the law. 
On the one hand, want of conformity unto the law is failure to do what Scripture commands. This is often called sin of omission because we omit or neglect what we should be doing. On the other hand, transgression of the law is doing what Scripture forbids. This kind of lawbreaking is often called sin of commission because we actively commit sin by thinking, feeling or doing something that Scripture forbids.
Now, when we talk about the law of God as the standard that defines sin, it’s important to point out that God’s law is not arbitrary or random. On the contrary, the law is a reflection of God’s perfect character. Listen to the way Paul described the law in Romans 7:12:

> The law is holy, and the commandment is holy, righteous and good (Romans 7:12).

As Paul said here, God’s commandments are always holy, righteous and good, just like God himself. God’s commands always accord with his nature.
This is why Scripture teaches that if we love God, we’ll keep his commandments. If we love God, we will also love those things that reflect God, such as his law. We see this in Deuteronomy 5:10 and 6:5-6, Matthew 22:37-40, John 14:15-24, and many other places. Listen to what John wrote in 1 John 5:3:
> 
> This is love for God: to obey his commands (1 John 5:3).

Love for God is manifested in obedience to his law. So, when we break his law, we are not acting in love for God. And therefore, we are sinning.

> There is in the Bible a very close connection between loving God and obeying God. I think the first thing that we have to clarify is that merely loving God is not a fulfillment of the command to love God. There can be a duty-oriented, obligatory drudgery that was never in mind when the Bible said “If you love me,” or Christ said, “If you love me, keep my commandments.” But if the love is there, if there is this voluntary self-giving rooted in a delight in God, then the most natural and validating manifestation of that will be a profound, willing and ready obedience because it’s rooted in a desire to be pleasing to this God whom you love and delight in; it’s rooted in the trust that this “God’s way” is as reliable and for your good as his own character. 
> 
> —	Dr. Glen G. Scorgie

When we fail to act out of love for God, we sin by rebelling against him, by transgressing his law, by doing evil, by missing the mark, by offending his holy, righteous and good character. But when our love for God motivates us, we put his interests and demands above our own. And as a result, we can avoid many sins and their terrible consequences in our lives.
With this definition of sin as violation of God’s laws in mind, let’s turn to the origin of sin in the human race.


#### Origin of Sin
	
Most of us are familiar with the events recorded in Genesis 3, the account of when our first parents Adam and Eve rebelled against God by eating the forbidden fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. From a biblical point of view, this act was not an isolated event. It caused the entire human race to become guilty of sin, and to be corrupted by sin. Theologians commonly refer to this event as humanity’s fall into sin, or simply the Fall.
Genesis 1:26-31 tells us that when God created humanity, we were very good. In this case, the word “good” means that we were precisely what God wanted us to be. Our first parents were morally pure images of God, perfectly suited to serve him by filling and ruling over the world God had created. 
As Paul indicated in Romans 5:12, sin had not entered humanity before the Fall. We had never committed sin, we were not inclined toward sin, we were not corrupted by sin, and we were not indwelt by sin. 
But even in this sinless state, we did have both the ability and the opportunity to sin. When God created Adam and Eve and placed them in the Garden of Eden, he revealed many things to them. But one command quickly moved to the foreground as a test of their willingness to serve God. In Genesis 2:16-17, we read that God permitted Adam and Eve to eat from any tree in the garden except for the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. And the possibility of breaking this law presented an opportunity for Adam and Eve to sin. 
Tragically, as we know from Genesis 3:1-6, the serpent deceived Eve into eating the forbidden fruit. Then Eve offered some of the fruit to Adam, and he ate it too. Adam and Eve violated God’s righteous law and willfully chose to sin. Revelation 12:9 indicates that the serpent was actually Satan, and 1 Timothy 2:14 indicates that Eve was deceived. But neither Satan’s temptations nor Eve’s foolishness excused the sin of our first parents. They both were guilty of choosing evil instead of good. 
In these events we see once again that sin is fundamentally a matter of violating God’s law, his revealed will. Whenever we think, speak or act in ways that differ from God’s revealed law, we are choosing evil instead of good. And even if we’re deceived or tricked into sinning, God still holds us accountable for what we’ve done. That’s why it’s so helpful to hide God’s word in our hearts — not just so that we know it, but also so that we love it. When we know God’s law, it helps us recognize sin so that won’t be deceived. And when we love God’s law, it makes it easier to choose to obey him.
Having considered sin’s definition and origin, we’re ready to look at the consequences of sin.


#### Consequences of Sin

Scripture indicates that after Adam and Eve sinned, God judged and cursed the entire human race. This curse affected every aspect of their being. It immediately resulted in the spiritual death that is spoken of throughout Scripture, as in John 5:24-25, Ephesians 2:1-5, and Colossians 2:13-14. It also produced corruption in our beings, both body and soul, as we see in Jeremiah 17:9 and Romans 7:18–8:11. And it ultimately led to physical death, as we read in Genesis 3:19 and Romans 5:12. Finally, sin earned humanity eternal suffering under God’s judgment in hell, as we learn from passages like Matthew 5:29-30.
The well-known pastor Charles Spurgeon, who lived from 1834 to 1892, spoke of God’s curse on Adam and Eve in his sermon The Curse Removed. Listen to what he said:

> What does that curse include? It involves death, the death of this body … It includes spiritual death, a death of that inner life which Adam had — the life of the spirit, which hath now fled, and can only be restored by [the] Holy Spirit … And it includes, last of all, and worst of all, that death eternal … all that can be gathered in that terrible, that awful … word “hell.” 

What’s worse, the consequences of Adam and Eve’s sin also spread to the entire human race — to everyone who descended from them through natural generation. We see the universal extent of sin in passages like 1 Kings 8:46, Romans 3:9-12, Galatians 3:22, and Ephesians 2:3. Listen to the way Paul talked about Adam’s sin in Romans 5:12-19:

> Sin entered the world through one man, and death through sin, and in this way death came to all men, because all sinned … [Through] the disobedience of the one man the many were made sinners (Romans 5:12, 19).

As we saw in an earlier lesson, Adam was the covenant head of the entire human race. And Paul taught that because of this, Adam’s sin was credited to all his descendants. And as a result, we are sinners by nature. We come into the world spiritually dead, subject to pain and hardship, and destined for physical death. 

> It’s hard to exaggerate; it’s impossible for us even to understand the full consequence of sin. But our sin is a revolt against the Creator. It is an effort to rob him of his glory, it is breaking his law, it is falling short of his glory. It is in every way setting ourselves as God’s enemies. Sin disrupts our relationship with God because God is holy. He cannot look upon sin. As a consequence of his holiness, he must pour out his wrath upon sin. So, when you look at human sinfulness, it is everything we need to know about our problem. It’s also everything we need to know about ourselves. Sin is the short, three-letter psychology that helps us to understand what we see in the mirror, and what we know ourselves to be. It also reminds us that there is no way we can rescue ourselves from this predicament. Only God can do that, and he does so in Christ. 
> 
> —	Dr. R. Albert Mohler, Jr.

The problem of sin is truly dire. All humanity is utterly lost and condemned. We have no way to redeem ourselves. We are perpetually doomed to suffer under God’s judgment. There is no way for us to earn back his favor, or to make amends for our sin. Apart from God’s gracious forgiveness, there is absolutely no hope of salvation.
Having looked at the problem of sin, we should turn our discussion of the forgiveness of sins toward the divine grace that makes forgiveness possible.
