### DIVINE GRACE

In his mercy, God was not willing to let the entire human race remain under the curse of sin. He still planned for humanity to fill and rule over the earth, and to turn it into a kingdom worthy of his presence. So, he sent a Redeemer to solve the problem of sin. And that Redeemer was his Son, Jesus Christ.
As Redeemer, Jesus saves us from our guilt and corruption; he reconciles us to himself; he restores our ability to turn the world into his earthly kingdom. God’s plan does not rely on the ability of mere human beings to merit our own salvation. It relies on God’s grace, his unmerited favor, granted to us through our special representative: the Lord Jesus Christ. As we read in Romans 3:23-24:

> All have sinned and fall short of the glory of God, and are justified freely by his grace through the redemption that came by Christ Jesus (Romans 3:23-24).

As a work of divine grace, forgiveness involves all three persons of the Trinity, the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. And it began with the Father.


#### Father

> Salvation is Trinitarian at heart: the Father who initiates, the Son who accomplishes, the Spirit who applies. When we think of the Father-Son relationship we should think of — when we think of Father, Son and Holy Spirit, all three persons are involved in the planning of our salvation. All three persons are acting in grace and in love and in mercy as well as upholding wrath and righteousness and judgment. So, when the Father is seen as initiator, he’s not doing that independent of the Son and the Holy Spirit. 
> 
> —	Dr. Stephen J. Wellum

Forgiveness began with the Father because he was the one that planned it. The New Testament explicitly teaches that the Father sent the Son into the world and appointed him as the Redeemer. We see this in John 3:16-18, Acts 2:34-36, and Hebrews 3:1-2.
The New Testament also teaches that the father authorized Jesus’ empowerment as the Redeemer of his people, and promised to accept Jesus’ sacrifice on the cross as payment for sin. We read about these roles of the Father in passages like John 10:14-18, Colossians 1:18-20 and Hebrews 2:10. 
In fact, Romans 3:25 says that it was the Father who offered up Jesus as a sacrifice. Listen to what Paul wrote there:
> 
> God presented him as a sacrifice of atonement (Romans 3:25).

The Father is the great architect of redemption. It’s his gracious plan and merciful desire to forgive our sins and to bless us. And it’s his authority that makes salvation both possible and certain.

> The idea that at the cross, that Jesus is trying to turn away the anger of his heavenly Father against his people in such a way that Jesus is loving and that the Father is not, is actually a very serious misconstrual of what is happening in the atoning work of Jesus Christ. Jesus’ work on the cross is actually the expression of the Father’s prior love for his people. Think how often in the New Testament it is stressed that Jesus coming into this world and his bearing of the cross is in fact the result of the Father’s love. The verse that most of us memorize perhaps first in our Christian life, John 3:16, emphasizes “For God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son…” Now, whose love is being emphasized in that verse? I don’t mean in any way to take away from the love of Jesus, but it’s the love of the heavenly Father in the giving of the Son, that is being emphasized in that passage. 
> 
> —	Dr. J. Ligon Duncan III


#### Son
	
The divine grace that accomplishes our forgiveness also involved the Son, who is our Redeemer.
In fulfillment of the Father’s promise, the Son was sent into the world, becoming incarnate as Jesus, the long-awaited Messiah, in order to atone for human sin. We find this teaching in many places like Romans 3:25-26, and Hebrews 2:14-17, and 10:5-10.
Jesus atoned for sin by dying on the cross in place of sinners. He received the divine curse that had been warranted by our sin. And his perfect righteousness was credited to our account, so that we would be counted not as sinners, but as obedient children of God. To list just a few of the places this theme appears, we find it in John 10:14-18, Galatians 2:20, 2 Corinthians 5:21, and Hebrews 10:9-14. 
As Paul wrote in Ephesians 1:7:

> In [Jesus Christ] we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, in accordance with the riches of God’s grace (Ephesians 1:7).

Our sins are forgiven not because God ignores them, but because he has punished them in Christ. And that’s why Scripture encourages us to have such confidence in our salvation.
Besides depending on these works of the Father and Son, forgiveness is also the result of divine grace from the Holy Spirit.


#### Holy Spirit
	
The Holy Spirit is the person of the Trinity who actually applies forgiveness to our lives. The Father laid the plans and the Son accomplished the atonement. But our sins are not actually forgiven until the Holy Spirit does his work. 
When we first come to faith, the Spirit reconciles us to God by forgiving all the sins we have committed up to that point. He also gives us new spiritual life by regenerating our spirits, as Jesus talked about in John 3:5-8. Acts 11:18 speaks of this experience as “repentance unto life” because regeneration and faith will always involve sorrow and confession of our sinfulness. This idea is confirmed in many passages, such as 1 Corinthians 6:11. 
And the Spirit continues to apply forgiveness to us throughout our lives. He is the one that maintains our faith, that leads us to daily repentance, and that continually applies forgiveness to us. We see this in places like Romans 8:1-16 and Galatians 5:5. As just one example, listen to what Paul wrote in 2 Thessalonians 2:13:

> God chose you to be saved through the sanctifying work of the Spirit and through belief in the truth (2 Thessalonians 2:13).

Here, Paul wrote that believers are saved by the works of the Spirit that cleanse us from sin and unrighteousness, that is, the works of the Spirit that apply forgiveness to us. And the Spirit continues to apply forgiveness to us as we continue to believe in the truth.
The Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit all demonstrate saving grace toward us. And this has at least three implications for our lives. First, when we sin and appeal to God for forgiveness and other aspects of salvation, we are right to make our petitions known to all three divine persons. Second, when we receive these blessings, we should give thanks to all three persons of God. And third, we can take great confidence in our salvation, knowing that all three persons of the Trinity love us and work to ensure our redemption. The Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit are all working together, for our benefit, to solve the problem of sin.
Having looked at the forgiveness of sins from the perspectives of the problem of sin and divine grace, we’re ready to talk about the role individual responsibility plays in forgiveness.


### INDIVIDUAL RESPONSIBILITY
	
Scripture clearly teaches that God does not forgive the sins of every person. Some people are forgiven, and some are not. Why is this true? From a human perspective, the reason is that the process of forgiveness ordinarily involves an element of individual responsibility. Generally speaking, those people that fulfill these responsibilities are forgiven, but those that shirk these responsibilities are not.
Our discussion of the role of individual responsibility will divide into two parts. First, we’ll mention some conditions that Scripture identifies as ordinary requirements for forgiveness. And second, we’ll talk about the means of receiving forgiveness. Let’s begin with the conditions that Scripture associates with forgiveness.


#### Conditions
	
Scripture speaks of two primary conditions for forgiveness. First, it speaks of faith in God as a prerequisite for forgiveness. In Scripture, faith is a multifaceted concept. But in this context, when we speak of faith in God, we have in mind:

Acknowledgement of God’s divine sovereignty, loyal submission to him, and trust that he will show us mercy for the sake of our redeemer Jesus Christ.

Although it may sound strange to modern ears, Scripture often refers to this type of faith as the “fear of God.”
For example, Psalm 103:8-13 describes the conditional nature of forgiveness in this way:

> The Lord is compassionate and gracious, slow to anger, abounding in love. He will not always accuse, nor will he harbor his anger forever; he does not treat us as our sins deserve or repay us according to our iniquities. For as high as the heavens are above the earth, so great is his love for those who fear him; as far as the east is from the west, so far has he removed our transgressions from us. As a father has compassion on his children, so the Lord has compassion on those who fear him (Psalm 103:8-13).

Notice that it’s those who fear the Lord that receive his forgiveness, whose transgressions are removed.
This same idea is found throughout the Bible. For instance, in 2 Chronicles 30:18-19, the Lord is said to pardon the people who set their hearts on seeking him. In Mark 4:12, Jesus indicated that only those who perceive and understand the Lord can turn to him for forgiveness. And in Acts 26:17-18, forgiveness can only be had by those whose eyes have been opened to the truth of the Lord’s glory and power.
The second ordinary condition of forgiveness found in Scripture is brokenness. Brokenness is:

**Genuine sorrow over sin; true regret over violating God’s law.**

It’s not simply sorrow over being caught or punished, but agreement that the Lord’s requirements are holy, and broken-heartedness over having failed to honor him. 

> In terms of contrition, we are meant, you and I, to sense the guilt of our sin. I think of David after he’d sinned with Bathsheba. Yes, he had sinned against Bathsheba, and he had sinned against Bathsheba’s husband. He had sinned against the church of the Old Testament, but ultimately “against thee, thee only, have I sinned and done this evil in thy sight.” And you sense something of the contrition of his heart. The modern term, I think, is “brokenness,” and we need the word, by the Spirit, to break us, to break us in the presence of God. 
> 
> —	Dr. Derek Thomas

For example, in 2 Samuel 11, David showed no remorse when he committed adultery with Bathsheba, and then arranged for the death of her husband Uriah in order to hide her pregnancy. He lived without sorrow for his actions for the entire time of Bathsheba’s pregnancy, until after his child was born. At that time, the prophet Nathan confronted David over his sin, as we learn in 2 Samuel 12. Only then did David admit his crime and feel deep conviction over it. Then, in a spirit of true brokenness, he wrote Psalm 51, his great psalm of repentance, to express the depth of his sorrow and regret. Listen to what David wrote in Psalm 51:6, 17:

> Surely you desire truth in the inner parts … The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; a broken and contrite heart, O God, you will not despise (Psalm 51:6, 17).

David recognized that in order to receive God’s forgiveness, he needed to share God’s perspective on his sin. He needed to hate what he had done, and to be truly sorry for it.
We see this same emphasis on brokenness in Psalm 32 verses 1 and 2, where forgiveness comes to those who have no deceit in them. We find it in Isaiah 55:7, where God’s mercy is given to those who forsake their sin. And we hear it in Jeremiah 5:3, where forgiveness is denied to those whose hearts are hard with regard to their sin.

> I think we cultivate contrition, which is the heart of repentance, by focusing our minds on the holiness of God. We can do that by contemplating what the Bible says from Genesis to Revelation about the God who cannot fellowship with disobedient people, but who judges disobedience, brings retribution on those who transgress. That is God’s holiness in its very essence. And as we brood on God’s holiness, let’s then look back to the track record of our own lives and review just some of the ways in which we have transgressed, disobeyed, wandered off in disregard of what God has said, made a mess of our lives in a way that dishonors him. Now then think back, now all the retribution that was due to me for that has actually fallen on Christ’s shoulders and been endured by him. And that tells me just how grievous my own sins were, that they could only be atoned for by the death of the incarnate Son of God for me. And as I realize how grievous my sins are in light of the holiness of God and what was demanded to put them away, so my sense of the grievousness of sin will be made more acute, my contrition will be deepened, and out of that will come an honest attempt all over again, again and again and again, to commit myself to God for holiness, to tell him how much I regret and indeed hate the sins that made the atonement necessary. 
> 
> —	Dr. J. I. Packer

The conditions of faith and brokenness are important to the life of every person, whether or not we are believers. For those who have not received Christ as Lord and savior, these conditions are opportunities for them to come to God to have their sins forgiven, and to begin new life in Christ. For those of us who already belong to the Lord, they are reminders that we need to live lives of constant faith, and to be truly sorry for the sins we continue to commit, so that we can continue to receive forgiveness and cleansing on a daily basis.
Now that we’ve seen that the conditions for forgiveness normally include God working faith and brokenness in our hearts, let’s look at the ordinary means by which we can receive forgiveness.

