#### Means
	
Sometimes, Christians fail to distinguish between a means of grace and a basis of grace. As a result, they mistakenly think that a means of grace can be used to earn grace, or even to force God to be gracious to us. So, it’s important to distinguish clearly between a means and a basis. To help us see this distinction, imagine that a person needs physical therapy to recover from an injury. The therapy is expensive, and is paid for by a donor. We might say that the means by which the person fully recovers is the therapy. But the financial basis for this recovery would be the donation. 
We might summarize these differences by saying that a basis is the ground or merit on which an action or consequence is based, whereas a means is a tool or mechanism for bringing that action or consequence to pass. 
When it comes to receiving forgiveness and grace from God, the basis is always the merit of Christ, which he earned by his obedient life and sacrificial death on the cross. We see this in places like Matthew 26:28, Colossians 1:13-14, and 1 John 2:12. Forgiveness is always earned. But it’s earned by Christ, not by us. And the fundamental means by which all grace is applied to our lives is faith. Whether expressed directly to God, or through means of grace, faith is the primary tool through which God applies grace and other blessings to our lives.
Scripture mentions several means through which faith normally works. For our purposes in this lesson, we can summarize these other means in two general categories, beginning with prayer.
Throughout Scripture, prayer is presented as an ordinary means for appealing to God for grace and forgiveness. For instance, the Bible commonly speaks of prayers of confession and repentance as expressions of faith through which the Holy Spirit applies forgiveness to us. The effectiveness of these prayers is taught in 1 Kings 8:29-40, Psalm 32:1-11, Acts 8:22, 1 John 1:9, and many other places.
For those who have just come to know the Lord, faithful prayers of confession and repentance are the means through which the Holy Spirit initially applies forgiveness and salvation to their lives. This is why the church referred to conversion as “repentance unto life” in Acts 11:18. And for all believers, prayers of confession and repentance continue to be important means of receiving God’s grace in our lives. As we read in 1 John 1:9:

> If we confess our sins, [God] is faithful and just and will forgive us our sins and purify us from all unrighteousness (1 John 1:9).

The wonderful news of the gospel is that God freely forgives our sins on the basis of what Christ has done for us. And we can receive this forgiveness simply by asking for it in faith.

> You know, a lot of folks think that if you teach that God will forgive sinners, simply by their coming to him and saying, “Forgive me, heavenly Father,” that that will cheapen the grace of God. But the fact of the matter is, it exalts the grace of God, not because our repentance saves us, or is the basis on which God forgives us, but because God has himself provided the basis of our forgiveness and reconciliation in the infinitely valuable and incalculably costly death of his only begotten son. 
> 
> —	Dr. J. Ligon Duncan III


> The fact that Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the second person of the Trinity came to earth and spent thirty years in humility and servanthood and then suffered and died on the cross — took on the eternal debt of sin on the cross to pay the penalty for our sins. That’s an eternal price, that’s an eternal cost, an enormous cost, an infinite cost for our sins. So, this is not cheap grace at all. This is the most expensive grace ever achieved. We receive it as a free gift, but only because Jesus gave his all for us. 
> 
> —	Dr. Mark L. Strauss


> 
> All who come to him and simply say, “Forgive me, Lord,” are forgiven. Not because their request for forgiveness was so noble, not because their repentance was so good, but because Jesus has done everything that is necessary for us to be reunited in fellowship with our heavenly Father. 
> 
> —	Dr. J. Ligon Duncan III

Now, we should pause to mention that in addition to prayers of confession and repentance, which function as ordinary means of forgiveness, prayers of intercession sometimes function as extraordinary or unusual means of forgiveness. Intercession can be defined as: mediation; or petition or prayer on behalf of another. 
Scripture records many biblical examples of people offering effective intercessory prayers. We see this in Numbers 14:19-20, where the Lord forgave the sin of Israel in response to Moses’ intercessory prayer. We find it in 2 Chronicles 30:18-20, where the Lord forgave the people who had not properly prepared for Passover in response to Hezekiah’s intercession. We see it in Job 1:5, where we learn that Job regularly offered effective intercessory sacrifices for his children. And we see it in James 5:14-15, where James taught that the elders of the church can obtain forgiveness for those who have sinned. God does not always apply forgiveness in response to the intercessory prayers of the faithful. But there are many times when he does. 
And beyond these types of human intercession, both the Son and the Holy Spirit intercede for people. The intercession Jesus offers is mentioned in places like Isaiah 53:12, Romans 8:34, and Hebrews 7:25. And the Spirit’s intercession is taught in Romans 8:26-27.
The second general category of means of forgiveness is the sacraments, or what many modern Protestant churches call the “ordinances,” namely baptism and the Lord’s Supper. 
Now, when we use the term “sacrament,” we need to be clear that we are not talking about the view of the Lord’s Supper and baptism found in the Roman Catholic Church. Rather, the word “sacrament” has historically been used by many Protestant denominations to refer to the Lord’s Supper and baptism. These ceremonies are special, holy ordinances that God provided to the church as means of expressing our faith and receiving his blessing. Protestant traditions differ over the details of the workings of these ordinances. But they all agree that they are special in some way.
Sometimes Christians feel suspicious when they hear others talk about the Lord’s Supper and baptism as means of forgiveness. So, it’s important to emphasize that we are not saying that these ordinances have any merit in themselves that make them effective. They are not the basis of forgiveness. 
At the same time, the Bible teaches that when we express our faith through the Lord’s Supper and baptism, the Holy Spirit uses these ordinances to apply forgiveness to our lives. 
Baptism is spoken of as a means of grace in passages like Mark 1:4, Acts 2:38, Romans 6:1-7, and Colossians 2:12-14.
As just one example, listen to Ananias’ words to Paul in Acts 22:16:

> And now what are you waiting for? Get up, be baptized and wash your sins away, calling on his name (Acts 22:16).

In these instructions, Ananias indicated that Paul’s sins would be forgiven or “washed away” through baptism. 
Now, of course, baptism is not a necessary means of forgiveness. We can be forgiven in other ways as well. For example, the thief who came to faith while being crucified with Jesus was never baptized. Nevertheless, Luke 23:43 indicates that he was forgiven and saved. So, we should not make the mistake of thinking that forgiveness and salvation are only available to those who have been baptized. Still, Scripture makes it abundantly clear that baptism ordinarily functions as a means of applying forgiveness to our lives. 
And the same is true of the Lord’s Supper. Paul explicitly taught that partaking of the Lord’s Supper is a means of receiving the benefits of Christ’s death, such as forgiveness. Listen to what he wrote in 1 Corinthians 10:16:

> Is not the cup of thanksgiving for which we give thanks a participation in the blood of Christ? And is not the bread that we break a participation in the body of Christ? (1 Corinthians 10:16).

These were rhetorical questions. Everyone reading Paul’s letter knew that the answers were, “Yes, of course.” By partaking of the Lord’s Supper in faith, we are united to Christ. 
Forgiveness of sins is a great blessing of salvation that we experience throughout our Christian lives. Whether we are new converts, or lifelong believers, forgiveness is a continual aspect of our walk with Christ. And it results in many other blessings as well.
John Wesley, a founder of the Methodist church who lived from about 1703 to 1791, spoke about forgiveness in his Sermon number 26, in which he exposited the Sermon on the Mount. Listen to what he said there:

> As soon as … we receive forgiveness of sins, we receive likewise a lot among those who are sanctified, by faith which is in him. Sin has lost its power: It has no dominion over those who are under grace, that is, in favor with God. As there is now no condemnation for them that are in Christ Jesus, so they are freed from sin as well as from guilt. The righteousness of the law is fulfilled in them, and they walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit. 
> 
> 
> I think the forgiveness of sins is, in some ways, the most precious reality we have as Christians. Fundamentally what it means to be forgiven of our sins is to be in a right relationship with God, with our Creator. When we look at the world today, we see that people are longing for meaning, for significance, for purpose. And there’s so much confusion in our culture. What is life all about? What is the reason for living? Why am I here? And so people try all sorts of things to find meaning and significance — whether they pursue their job or sexuality or drugs. I mean there are all kinds of venues and paths where people are trying to find happiness and joy. But the gospel tells us our fundamental need as human beings is to be in a right relationship with our Creator, with the one who made us. The gospel says that God sent his Son, Jesus Christ, to atone for our sins, to absorb the wrath of God. God out of his love sent his Son so that our sins could be forgiven, so that if we put our trust in him we can be forgiven of our sins. And when we come to that experience, when we turn to Jesus Christ for such forgiveness there is an incredible sense of peace, a sense of rightness with the world because it truly is a rightness with the world. We suddenly realize this is what we are created for. We are created to be in right relationship with God. We recognize at that moment. 
> 
> —	Dr. Thomas R. Schreiner

Now that we’ve explored the doctrine of the forgiveness of sins, we’re ready to consider our next article of faith: the resurrection of the body.

