## RESURRECTION
	
Recall these words from the Apostles’ Creed: 

> I believe in …
> The resurrection of the body.

We need to be clear at this point, that the creed is not talking about the resurrection of Jesus. Jesus’ own resurrection appears earlier in the creed when it says that Jesus rose from the dead on the third day. When the creed speaks of “the resurrection of the body” it has in mind the general resurrection — the resurrection of all people when Christ returns in glory. 
We’ll consider the general resurrection of the body in three steps. First, we’ll look at the curse that results in death for our bodies. Second, we’ll explain that the Christian gospel offers life for our bodies. And third, we’ll look at the way our bodies will eventually experience redemption. Let’s begin with the curse that causes our bodies to die.


### CURSE

As we saw in an earlier lesson, God created human beings to consist of physical bodies and non-physical souls. Based on Hebrews 4:12 and 1 Thessalonians 5:23, some traditions have maintained that each human being also possesses a spirit in addition to a soul. But there are approximately 200 verses in which one or the other of these terms is used to refer to all the inner, non-physical aspects of our being as a whole. So, most Christian traditions have concluded that the words “soul” and “spirit” both refer to the same underlying reality, and that human beings consist of only two main parts: body and soul. 
Before our fall into sin, our bodies and our souls were unaffected by sin and its corrupting powers. But when Adam and Eve fell into sin, sin corrupted not only their souls, but also their bodies. And this corruption of their bodies ultimately resulted in their physical death. Listen to God’s curse on Adam in Genesis 3:19:

> By the sweat of your brow you will eat your food until you return to the ground, since from it you were taken; for dust you are and to dust you will return (Genesis 3:19).

When Adam and Eve sinned against God, he cursed them both. And part of his curse was that they would be mortal. They would eventually die and return to dust. And because all human beings descend from Adam and Eve, we are all born with similar corruption. As Paul wrote in Romans 5:12:

> Sin entered the world through one man, and death through sin, and in this way death came to all men, because all sinned (Romans 5:12).

Sin affected Adam and Eve in both spiritual and physical ways. And because we are their natural descendants, we bear the same curse. Our souls come into the world in a state that the Bible describes as spiritual death. We are under God’s judgment, and have lost all ability to please him. We read about this in passages like Romans 5:12-19 and 8:1-8. 
And just like Adam and Eve, our bodies are also corrupted by sin. This corruption results in physical hardship, sickness, and eventually death. Paul talked about this in Romans 6:12-19, and 7:4-25. Sin corrupts all that we are — our entire being, body and soul. But the wonderful promise of God is that salvation in Christ redeems both our souls and our bodies.

> Christians should never view human death as something that’s normal. We often use in our language, or convey that kind of idea. Sometimes at funerals we can say of someone, “Well, they lived a good long life.” And it’s only at, maybe, the death of a young child or the death of someone maybe in their twenties or thirties that we say, “Oh, this is terrible.” No, this is really not a proper Christian view of human death. A Christian view of human death views all death as that which is abnormal. We were made to live from the very beginning forever. You think of how, even in the creation account on the seventh day, God rests. He would enter into full enjoyment with his creation. We would then live to his glory and carry out the creation mandate. We were not ever made to die. But instead, the wages of sin, the entrance of sin into this world, Genesis 3, the wages of sin the apostle Paul says, and spoken of in Genesis 2, is death. Death, which is physical; death which is also spiritual. 
> 
> —	Dr. Stephen J. Wellum

In some sense, physical death is a blessing to believers because we are taken directly into the presence of Christ. But in a more fundamental sense, physical death is tragic. It’s a universal human experience, but it’s also horribly unnatural. God did not create humanity for death; he created us for life. And our salvation won’t be complete until Christ returns and redeems our bodies. 
Having looked at the curse that results in death for our bodies, let’s turn to the aspects of the gospel that ensure our resurrection.


### GOSPEL

How many of us know Christians who believe that they will spend eternity in heaven as disembodied spirits? Probably more than a few. As odd as it may sound, the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead is almost completely unknown in some modern churches. And one reason for this is that Christians often fail to understand the significance of our human bodies. But Scripture clearly teaches the good news that not only our souls, but also our bodies, will be glorified when Christ returns. 
We’ll explore the idea that bodily resurrection is part of the gospel by considering three issues. First, we’ll mention the Old Testament background of this doctrine. Second, we’ll see that it’s clearly proclaimed in the New Testament. And third, we’ll talk about the relationship between the resurrection of believers and the resurrection of Jesus. Let’s start with the Old Testament.


#### Old Testament

Many modern Christians don’t realize this, but the word gospel, which means good news, actually comes from the Old Testament. In particular, we find it in Isaiah 52:7 and 61:1, and Nahum 1:15. As just one example, listen to Isaiah 52:7:

> How beautiful on the mountains are the feet of those who bring good news, who proclaim peace, who bring good tidings, who proclaim salvation, who say to Zion, “Your God reigns!” (Isaiah 52:7).

In the Old Testament, the “good news” or “gospel” was that God would save his people by defeating his enemies and theirs. In a narrow sense, this was the good news that God would rescue his people from the oppression of their earthly enemies. But in a broader sense, it was the good news that God would reverse all the curses that resulted from Adam and Eve’s fall into sin. He would extend his glorious heavenly reign over the entire earth, and ultimately bless everyone who had faith in him. 
Of course, the salvation God provided in the Old Testament was based on Christ’s future victory. Although Christ had not yet come to die for sin, he had already promised to die on behalf of his people. And that promise was sufficient to secure their salvation. In fact, every hope of salvation in the Old Testament pointed to Christ and what he would accomplish. 
Listen to the way Hebrews 10:1-5 describes the Old Testament sacrifices:

> The law is only a shadow of the good things that are coming — not the realities themselves… [I]t is impossible for the blood of bulls and goats to take away sins. Therefore, when Christ came into the world, he said: “Sacrifice and offering you did not desire, but a body you prepared for me.” (Hebrews 10:1-5).

The author of Hebrews indicated that the Old Testament sacrifices were only shadows of the reality that was later realized in Christ. Animal sacrifices could never perfectly atone for sin because God required that human sin be punished with human death. But they could and did point to Jesus, whose fully human death was a perfectly sufficient and effective atonement for sin.
As part of the gospel in the Old Testament, God’s people were taught that a day was coming when God would raise all the dead of humanity, and judge them for their deeds. Those who had lived righteously, having faith in God, would be everlastingly blessed. But those who rebelled against God would be condemned to a perpetual future of punishment. Both of these sets of consequences would continue forever in bodily form. Christian theologians commonly refer to this event as the last judgment.
As we saw in a prior lesson, the Apostles’ Creed refers to the last judgment in the line:

**From there he will come to judge the living and the dead.**

Perhaps the clearest statement of the idea that the last judgment involves bodily resurrection can be found in Daniel 12, where an angelic messenger revealed to Daniel that in the future God would deliver his people from oppression. 
Listen to what Daniel was told in Daniel 12:1-2:

> At that time your people — everyone whose name is found written in the book — will be delivered. Multitudes who sleep in the dust of the earth will awake: some to everlasting life, others to shame and everlasting contempt (Daniel 12:1-2).

Daniel specifically referred to bodily resurrection when he spoke of those who sleep in the dust of the earth. Souls do not sleep in the dust of earth; bodies do. And it’s those bodies that will be raised at the final judgment.
Isaiah also spoke of a day of judgment that included a general resurrection. 
Listen to what he wrote in Isaiah 26:19-21:

Your dead will live; their bodies will rise. You who dwell in the dust, wake up and shout for joy… [T]he earth will give birth to her dead… See, the LORD is coming out of his dwelling to punish the people of the earth for their sins (Isaiah 26:19-21).

Once again, we see that the dead, those who dwell in the dust, will rise from their graves with new life, as if the earth were giving birth to them. And this will occur in the context of judgment, as the Lord comes to punish the people of the earth for their sins.
The doctrine of the resurrection of the dead is also implied in several Old Testament passages that speak of deliverance from Sheol in the context of final judgment and recompense, such as Psalm 49:7-15, and Psalm 73:24-28. And in Job 19:25-27, Job confidently expressed his belief that he would be resurrected to see God on the day the Lord came to stand upon the earth — the day of judgment.

> The future resurrection and judgment isn’t as clear in the Old Testament as it is in the New. But certainly, there are indications in the Old Testament that this is going to take place. Isaiah for example speaks of a time in which dead people will live, come out of their graves. Daniel speaks similarly of a time when the dead will come forth, the righteous and the wicked to final judgment. And so, this is something that, this is a belief that sprang up, at least among some of the Jews, not all of them. The Pharisees of Jesus’ time believed in the resurrection. The Sadducees did not. But Jesus himself, when the Sadducees come and ask him whether there is such a thing, and they give him a trick question to make it look ridiculous, Jesus actually quotes the passage when God says: “I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.” And Jesus says, “[God] is not the God of the dead, but of the living.” So, Abraham, when God forms a relationship, a covenant relationship with somebody, it really is a personal relationship with that individual and if Abraham was just going to lie in the ground, and was never going to waken again, doesn’t make a whole lot of sense to say that God is in a covenant relationship forever with Abraham. So, that means that the New Testament is, of course, irrevocably committed to the doctrine of resurrection. And, of course, the resurrection of Jesus puts the final seal on that. 
> 
> —	Dr. John M. Frame

Having seen that the general resurrection was part of the gospel in the Old Testament, let’s look at the fact that it’s also part of the gospel message in the New Testament.


#### New Testament
	
The biggest difference between the Old Testament and New Testament gospel proclamations is that in the New Testament, the redeemer had finally come. He had finally been revealed in history as Jesus of Nazareth. God was now reigning through his Son, Jesus. This is why the New Testament so often emphasizes that Jesus is Lord, meaning that he is the reigning king. We see this in places like Luke 2:11; Acts 2:36; Romans 10:9; and 1 Corinthians 12:3.

> Salvation comes the same way in the Old and New Testaments, by faith in the promise of God’s provision. What’s different about faith in the Old Testament and faith in the New is not faith towards God, but the specificity with which the promise is given. Faith in the Old Testament is fundamentally forward looking in a promise yet to be fulfilled. Faith in the New Testament forward is retrospective looking back at the cross, at a promise that has been fulfilled. So, they’re, they both involve faith directed towards God for a provision that he will make and we cannot supply. 
> 
> —	Dr. Robert G. Lister

In Jesus, all the Old Testament promises of salvation are being fulfilled. As we saw in Hebrews 10:1-5, his death is the reality to which the Old Testament sacrifices pointed. And in Romans 15:8-13, and Galatians 3:16, Paul taught that Jesus’ gospel fulfills the promises made to the Old Testament patriarchs. In these and many other ways, the New Testament affirms the Old Testament gospel — the good news that the divine king has finally come to bring salvation to his people by grace through faith.
Jesus taught that the general resurrection will take place at the last judgment. For instance, in Matthew 22:23-32 and Luke 20:27-38, he refuted the Sadducees’ denial of the general resurrection. In Luke 14:13-14, he encouraged believers to do good works on the basis that they would be rewarded in the resurrection. And in John 11:24-26, he confirmed the doctrine in his talks with Martha, the sister of Lazarus. Listen to what Jesus said in Luke 20:37:

> In the account of the bush, even Moses showed that the dead rise (Luke 20:37).

Here, Jesus insisted that the doctrine of the general resurrection had already been revealed in the Old Testament. And this same idea is confirmed throughout the rest of the New Testament. Unfortunately, in many branches of the church, the bodily resurrection of the dead is largely ignored. Many Christians believe that we will remain disembodied spirits for all eternity. But in Hebrews 6:1-2, the resurrection of the dead is described as one of the basic doctrines of the Christian faith. And in Hebrews 11:35, believers’ resurrection is held out as a motivation for doing good works. In fact, the Apostles regularly pointed out that Christians believed in the Old Testament promises of resurrection. For instance, Peter and John did this in Acts 4:1-2. And Paul did it in Acts 23:6-8 and 24:14-21. 
As just one example, listen to how Paul defended his ministry in Acts 24:14-15: 

> I admit that I worship the God of our fathers as a follower of the Way, which they call a sect. I believe everything that agrees with the Law and that is written in the Prophets, and I have the same hope in God as these men, that there will be a resurrection of both the righteous and the wicked (Acts 24:14-15).

Here, Paul pointed out that the Christian hope in the general resurrection at the last judgment was precisely the same as the Jewish hope. The difference was that the Christians believed this resurrection would be accomplished through Christ.
It’s important for us to understand that God’s plan of salvation has always been the same. He didn’t appoint one way for ancient Israel to be saved, and another way for us to be saved. He didn’t appoint one way of salvation for the Jews, and another for the Gentiles. The Old and the New Testaments are united in their teaching. And that’s part of the reason that Christians treasure the Old Testament as God’s word for their lives. God’s people have always been saved by grace, through faith, and in Christ. Christians are part of a long history of the mercy and redemption God has always provided for his faithful people. And the whole Bible — both Testaments — teaches us about this wonderful truth.
Now that we’ve seen that in both the Old Testament and the New Testament, the gospel included the good news that there would be a resurrection of the dead, let’s take a look at the relationship between the resurrection of believers and the resurrection of Jesus.
