## EVERLASTING LIFE
	
The Apostles’ Creed mentions everlasting life in its last article of faith:

> I believe in …
> The life everlasting.

At this point, the creed has in view the everlasting life, often called eternal life, that follows the resurrection of our bodies. The creed affirms the belief that all God’s faithful people will ultimately be rewarded with perfect, blessed, incorruptible, never-ending life.
Although there are many things we might say about everlasting life, we’ll focus on three issues in this lesson: First, we’ll mention the timing of everlasting life. When does it begin? Second, we’ll talk about the quality of everlasting life. How does it differ from other kinds of life? And third, we’ll mention the location where we will live forever. Let’s begin with the timing of our everlasting life.


### TIMING
	
> When does eternal life begin? Christ said that he’s come that we might have life and have it abundantly. Certainly, he’s suggesting that to be in Christ, to be a disciple of Christ, introduces us to a qualitatively superior way of living, but is that eternal life? Does eternal life begin when we pass from this sphere of mortal existence to the life beyond? Is that when eternal life begins? Well, in a sense, yes. But there’s, in another sense, the new life, the resurrection life of Christ that will carry us through the grave and propel us on into eternity, an unending eternity with God, is a life that has been planted as a seed within us now. So that the life that will never end is beginning now, and it’s important to understand that this eternal life is not just a life defined by endless duration, but a life defined qualitatively as a life that is now Christ-centered and God-centered and is moving toward the full restoration of all that was intended for human beings. And we get to participate in that now, even while we were still embedded in a painful, struggling, broken world. 
> 
> —	Dr. Glen G. Scorgie

Scripture often says that believers already possess everlasting life as a present reality. We see this in John 10:28, 1 Timothy 6:12, 1 John 5:11-13, and many other places. As just one example of this, listen to what Jesus said in John 5:24:

> I tell you the truth, whoever hears my word and believes him who sent me has eternal life and will not be condemned; he has crossed over from death to life (John 5:24).

Jesus and the writers of the New Testament sometimes talked about eternal or everlasting life as a present reality that results from our union with Christ. And, of course, this is true. Our souls will never die, even though our bodies will. The spiritual life we possess now is the same life we’ll have forever.
On the other hand, Scripture talks even more frequently about the fact that we will be given everlasting life as our inheritance at the last judgment. We see this in places like Matthew 25:46, Mark 10:29-30, John 12:25, Romans 2:5-7, and Jude 21. As just one example, listen to what John wrote in 6:40 of his gospel:
> 
> For my Father’s will is that everyone who looks to the Son and believes in him shall have eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day (John 6:40).

As John did here, Scripture often associates our full reception of eternal life with the resurrection of our bodies. When our bodies are made alive, we will live forever, body and soul, as fully redeemed and fully restored human beings.

> I think it’s helpful to describe what we receive in Christ, through our union with Christ, is that which is both “already” and “not yet.” And by that, I mean that the benefits of Christ, which includes eternal life, are ours “already” when we receive Christ, when we put our faith in Christ. They are ours — we have eternal life. Yet at same time, it’s “not yet” in this sense, that, of course, even after we receive Christ many of us will grow old, many of us will get sick, many of us will experience death if Christ does not return before. And in that sense, then the “not yet” of eternal life awaits us still. So, the “already” — “not yet,” I think helps us understand, yes, we do have an eternal life, and yet at same time, eternal life awaits us in the new heavens and new earth. 
> 
> —	Dr. Jeffrey K. Jue

There’s a sense in which it’s fair to say that eternal life for our souls begins in this life when we are regenerated. But we won’t be completely alive until our bodies are raised at the last judgment. Only then will our entire being live before God. Before then, we have a foretaste of everlasting life through the redemption of our souls. But only when our bodies have also been given new life will we really live as God intended.
With this understanding of the timing of everlasting life in mind, let’s look at its quality.


### QUALITY

In the Bible, everlasting life is not simply a matter of having our existence and consciousness continue forever. After all, even people who are under the eternal judgment of God have continued existence and consciousness. Rather, the key quality of eternal life is that we will live forever in the blessings of God. In this sense, to have life is to receive God’s favor and blessing. And by contrast, to suffer death is to fall under his wrath and curse. Both eternal life and eternal death involve continued existence. The difference between them is the quality of that existence. As Jesus prayed in John 17:3:

> This is eternal life: that they may know you, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom you have sent (John 17:3).

Here, Jesus taught that eternal life is equivalent to knowing God and Jesus. In this context, the idea of knowing implies a loving relationship. Jesus’ point was that eternal life is not defined merely in terms of existence or consciousness, but in terms of the experience of God’s love. 
Or consider the way Paul talked about life and death in Romans 7:9-11, where he wrote this:

> Once I was alive apart from law; but when the commandment came, sin sprang to life and I died. I found that the very commandment that was intended to bring life actually brought death. For sin, seizing the opportunity afforded by the commandment, deceived me, and through the commandment put me to death (Romans 7:9-11).

During the entire period that Paul described here, he was physically and mentally alive. He existed as a conscious, rational being. Even so, he claimed first to have been alive, and then to have died, to have been put to death. And the difference was his standing before God. Before the law condemned him, he was alive. But once the law put him under God’s curse, Paul was dead. Later, when he came to Christ and the curse was lifted, he could be described as having new life. We see this same idea in places like John 5:24, and 1 John 3:14.
Think about it this way: On the last day, all the dead will be raised in the general resurrection. Our immortal souls will be reunited with our resurrected bodies. According to John 5:28-29, those who have done good will rise to be rewarded, and those who have done evil will rise to be condemned. Both will live conscious lives in their resurrected bodies forever. But the Bible calls the fate of the righteous “life,” and the fate of the wicked “death.” The difference is not whether or not they will exist or think or have experiences. The difference is their relationship to God. If we are under God’s blessing, the Bible says we are alive. If we are under his curse, it says we are dead. So, everlasting life is continued conscious existence in a blessed relationship with God. But what are these blessings? What does blessed life look like?

> I think we ought not to conceive of our eternal life with God as just floating on clouds, so to speak. But we’ll have new resurrected bodies; bodies that are not touched by sin and disease and death. We will be immortal; we will never die. And we’ll live on a new earth. Now, details elude us—what will that involve? We don’t know all the details, but we know that we will have some responsibility. We will reign with Christ. And I take it, since it’s a new universe that we will interact with the cosmos that God has created. So, there’ll be specific things, I take it, for us to do. But fundamentally, what the New Testament emphasizes, is not what we’ll do, as interesting as that is, and I’m sure it will be fascinating and fulfilling. But what the New Testament emphasizes is that God will be with us. We will see his face. Fellowship with him will be our all-satisfying joy. 
> 
> —	Dr. Thomas R. Schreiner

The famous theologian Louis Berkhof, who lived from 1873 to 1957, described the final state of everlasting life in part 6, chapter 5 of his book, Systematic Theology. Listen to how he put it:


> The fulness of this life is enjoyed in communion with God … They will see God in Jesus Christ face to face, will find full satisfaction in Him, will rejoice in Him, and will glorify Him… There will be recognition and social intercourse on an elevated plane… [T]he joy of each individual will be perfect and full. 

In some ways, it may seem strange that the Bible doesn’t talk about the nature of eternal life very often. After all, eternal life is the great reward the gospel offers to those who repent and have saving faith in Christ. But the reality is that Scripture tends to talk about eternal life in fairly general terms. Revelation 21:3-4 tell us that God will dwell with his people, and there will be no death or sadness. We will have new bodies, and we will be completely free from the presence, corruption and influence of sin. But what about the details? The truth is that the Bible says very little about them. Instead, it mostly encourages us to trust that God is good, and not to speculate too much about the wonders he has in store for us. Listen to what Paul wrote in 2 Corinthians 12:2-4:

> I know a man in Christ who … was caught up to the third heaven… caught up to paradise. He heard inexpressible things, things that man is not permitted to tell (2 Corinthians 12:2-4).

Notice what Paul said about this experience. The things heard were inexpressible — they could not be sufficiently expressed in human language. Moreover, man is not permitted to tell what this third heaven contained. It is so wonderful that God is keeping it secret for now. 
And this was only heaven — the intermediate state before our resurrection. If the secrets of heaven can’t be revealed, how much more the secrets of our final state? Who can possibly imagine how wondrous life will be when Christ returns? The Bible tells us that there will be no more sorrow, suffering, disappointment, or death. These things are wonderful and true, but the Bible simply doesn’t tell us very many details about them. 
Now that we have considered the timing and quality of everlasting life, let’s turn to our final topic: the location where we will live forever.

#### LOCATION

Scripture often speaks of the location where we will live eternally as the new heaven and new earth. We find this language in Isaiah 65:17 and 66:22, 2 Peter 3:13, and Revelation 21:1. This recreation of the heavens and earth brings the overarching storyline of the Bible to full completion. History began in Genesis 1:1 when God created the heavens and the earth. But then it was corrupted by humanity’s fall into sin, making it unfit for God to inhabit. The rest of the Bible tells the story of how both humanity and creation are being redeemed. And once Jesus returns, the ultimate result will be that the heavens and the earth will be redeemed and renewed, so that God will finally dwell on earth with his resurrected people. This is the goal Jesus had in mind in Matthew 6:9-10, when he taught us to pray these words:

> Our Father in heaven, hallowed be your name, your kingdom come, your will be done on earth as it is in heaven (Matthew 6:9-10).

The goal was always for God’s kingdom to be fully manifested in both the heavens, where the angels and the souls of the departed saints live, as well as on earth, where we live. This is why Jesus taught us to petition God to bring his kingdom to earth, and to cause his will to be obeyed on earth as fully as it is in heaven.
Although Scripture does not often speak of this new creation, when it does it makes it clear that the ultimate destination of redeemed human beings will not be in the heavens, but on the renewed earth. For instance, in Isaiah 65:17-19, we learn that God’s people will dwell in the renewed holy city of Jerusalem. And in Revelation 21:2, we find that this new Jerusalem will exist on the new earth. Listen to what John wrote in Revelation 21:1-5:

> Then I saw a new heaven and a new earth … I saw the Holy City, the new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God … And I heard a loud voice from the throne saying, “Now the dwelling of God is with men, and he will live with them. They will be his people, and God himself will be with them and be their God.” … He who was seated on the throne said, “I am making everything new!” (Revelation 21:1-5).

Here we see that God is preparing the New Jerusalem in heaven. And when the new earth is ready, he will bring the New Jerusalem to earth as his holy dwelling among his people, who will also inhabit the new earth. If God’s plan were simply to take us to heaven for eternity, there would be no need for a new earth. But as we read here, God is making everything new, including the world itself for our eternal home.
The early church father Augustine, the famous bishop of Hippo who lived from A.D. 354 to 430, wrote about the new earth in this way in his famous work The City of God, book 20, chapter 16:

> As the world itself is renewed to some better thing, it is fitly accommodated to men, themselves renewed in their flesh to some better thing. 
> 
> 
> There is a day coming when God will renew all things. We can see this especially in the beautiful words that Jesus taught us, his disciples, to pray when he said, “Our Father, who is in heaven, let your name be sanctified, let your kingdom come, and let your will be done on this earth even as it now is in heaven.” That crucial, central, foundational Christian idea is that we are now living in a time of waiting for the heavenly realities to become earthly realities — that the way things are done in heaven when God is hallowed, when all things are right, and righteousness and glory and truth and love reigns. Our hope as Christians, our sure hope, is that those realities of heaven will become earthly realities, and this is what the scriptures promise and hope as the new creation, our eternal home. 
> 
> —	Dr. Jonathan T. Pennington

If we lose sight of the fact that the new earth is to be our final home, it can be easy for us to detach ourselves from the physical aspects of reality, and to think that bodily existence on the earth is a hardship rather than a blessing. But when we recognize that the earth itself is to be our permanent home, we can see this present world as a blessing and a foretaste of the beauty and blessing that God has in store for us in the world to come.
