	
# Old Testament Foundations – Module One – Introduction
## Discussion Questions 

1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	Summarize some evangelical presuppositions that contrast with critical approaches to the Pentateuch.


3.	Which of the three interpretive strategies presented in the lesson do you normally use to study the Old Testament? Do you think you can benefit from the other strategies? Explain how? 


4.	Why is it important for us to be familiar with the approaches of modern critical scholars? 


5.	Does it concern you that Moses’ original writing of the Pentateuch may have gone through a process of updating after he wrote it? Does it make you question the inspiration and authority of the Pentateuch?  Why or why not?


6.	Do you consider yourself an “evangelical”? Explain why?


7.	There are a variety of names for God found in the Pentateuch. How can this variety allow us to emphasize various aspects of God’s character in our preaching and teaching?


8.	God displayed himself through supernatural means and miraculous acts in the Pentateuch. What are some ways that God’s supernatural activity in the past might give us confidence about God’s supernatural promises for our future?


9.	The purpose of the Pentateuch was to prepare Israel for faithful service to God in the conquest and settlement of the Promised Land. How can you apply this to your present life and ministry?


10.	What are some themes in the Pentateuch that reflect concepts that are important for us to apply today? Give an example of how you might apply one of these themes to your present work and teaching.
 
REVIEW STATEMENT on MODERN EVANGELICAL APPROACHES - PRESUPPOSITIONS: Evangelicals — defined here as those who hold to the full authority of Scripture — have certain assumptions or presuppositions about the Pentateuch. They assume supernaturalism: that God acts in ways that are without, beyond and even against ordinary processes and natural causes. This assures us that God is the kind of person who can and did inspire and superintend the writing of the Pentateuch and the development of the faith of Israel. Evangelicals also believe that God used Moses to write the Pentateuch.

CASE STUDY: Jaime had studied to become a pastor and got very good grades. The examining committee was impressed. During the seven hours of questioning, he got all the answers right. However, while he clearly believed in God's supernatural control over history, his love and his power, Jamie was a very fearful person. Unfortunately, the examining committee was only interested in whether or not he had the correct answers. They didn't consider whether or not there was evidence in his life that he actually believed these things — that his actions and character and emotions had been affected by God. Does he really love God? Does he really love others? These things they did not consider.
# Reflection Questions 	
1.	Try to identify any assumptions you have as you read the Pentateuch. Based your conclusions, not on what you say you believe, but on your actions and typical emotion responses. Imagine someone has been sent to determine your assumptions about the Pentateuch based on your actions alone. What would they conclude? Take into account such actions as: 
a.	How often you have read it. 
b.	Which parts of it you tend to read and which parts of it you tend to stay away from. Why? 
c.	How much time you spend reading it? 
d.	How seriously you take it in terms of application to your daily actions and motivations. 
e.	What do your actions and emotional responses say about your assumptions regarding God’s power? 
2.	What reasons do you have for believing that Moses wrote the Pentateuch? What does “essential Mosaic authorship” mean? 
3.	What difference does this belief make in your life? 
## Action Assignments
•	Examine yourself in your life and ministry, what constitutes the evidence that you believe in the authorship of Scripture? What constitutes the evidence that you believe God is supernaturally involved in history, is all powerful and loves you? If the evidence is merely what you say you believe, examine the evidence that might be found in the actions of your life and in your emotional responses and initiatives. What do you love? 

