## ORIGINAL MEANING
To grasp the original meaning of this portion of the primeval history, it will help to consider two matters: first, we will see how Moses connected this portion of his primeval history to Israel’s experience; and second, we will explore the implications of these connections for Moses’ original Israelite readers. Let’s look first at the ways Moses connected these chapters to the experiences of the Israelites whom he was leading.

### CONNECTIONS
Moses related these chapters of his primeval history to his contemporary world by describing the violence of early human history in ways that closely resembled the experiences of violence which Israel had endured. By doing so, he pointed out that the troubles which Israel faced were very similar to the troubles of the primeval world.
Now, to explore how Moses established these similarities, we will look once again at the two major sections of Genesis 4:1–6:8: the first scenario of early violence and hope of deliverance in chapters 4–5, and the second scenario of later violence and hope of deliverance in 6:1-8. Let’s look first at how Genesis 4–5 connected to Israel’s experience.

#### Early Violence and Hope
As we look at the characteristics of the wicked and righteous in Genesis 4–5, it becomes apparent that Moses shaped this material so that his readers would associate Cain and his family with the Egyptians, and so that they would associate righteous Abel, Seth, and the Sethites with themselves as the people of God. Now, how did Moses build these connections?
Narratives. We should begin by examining the story of sinful Cain in Genesis 4:1-16. In this story, Moses focused on at least five concerns that allowed the Israelites to connect this passage to their own day. In the first place, Moses mentioned the occupations of Cain and Abel to create these associations.
Listen to the way Cain and Abel were initially distinguished in Genesis 4:2:

> Now Abel kept flocks, and Cain worked the soil (Genesis 4:2).

As this passage indicates, Cain was a settled agriculturalist, a farmer, while Abel was a shepherd. In ancient and modern times, it has been common for tensions to arise between settled, agriculturally-based societies and nomadic shepherds. And as the book of Genesis itself indicates, Moses and the Israelites were quite aware of this kind of tension and how it led to serious trials while they were in Egypt. In Genesis 46:33-34, Joseph instructed his brothers in this way when they came to Egypt:

> When Pharaoh calls you in and asks, “What is your occupation?” you should answer, “Your servants have tended livestock from our boyhood on, just as our fathers did.” Then you will be allowed to settle in the region of Goshen, for all shepherds are detestable to the Egyptians (Genesis 46:33-34).

Joseph’s instructions here give us insight into why Moses mentioned that Cain was a farmer and Abel a shepherd. He wanted his Israelite readers to associate Cain, the agriculturalist, with the Egyptians, and he wanted Israel to associate themselves with Abel, the victimized shepherd.
A second connection between this story and Moses’ original audience appears in the motif of the sacrifices offered by Cain and Abel. As Genesis 4 tells us, God rejected Cain’s sacrifice but was pleased with Abel’s sacrifice. The reason for God’s distinction between these sacrifices is made explicit in Genesis 4:3-4, where we read these words:

> Cain brought some of the fruits of the soil as an offering to the Lord. But Abel brought fat portions from some of the firstborn of his flock (Genesis 4:3-4).

Notice the way Moses described the sacrifices. In verse 3 he said that Cain offered “some of the fruits of the soil,” but in verse 4 he wrote that Abel offered “fat portions from some of the firstborn of his flock.” This distinction is very important. Cain simply brought whatever fruits of his field he happened to gather. His worship was nominal at best because he did not reserve the best of his crop for God. But Abel fulfilled the law of God with a sincere heart by bringing the fat portions (which were highly prized for Old Testament sacrifices) from among the firstborn of his flocks (which were the most highly prized animals according to the Law of Moses). Cain’s sacrifice was little more than an insincere ritual. But by contrast, Abel offered sincere devotion to God.
Moses also used this distinction between the sacrifices of Cain and Abel to draw further associations with the Egyptians and Israel. This background is striking when we remember that Moses first approached Pharaoh to ask for the release of Israel because he wanted to offer sacrifices to Yahweh. As we read in Exodus 5:3, Moses and Aaron said these words to Pharaoh:

> The God of the Hebrews has met with us. Now let us take a three-day journey into the desert to offer sacrifices to the Lord our God (Exodus 5:3).

But Pharaoh refused their request. As Moses recorded in verse 4, Pharaoh told them

> “Moses and Aaron, why are you taking the people away from their labor? Get back to your work!” (Exodus 5:4).

So we see that just as Cain had dishonored God with his nominal sacrifices, the Egyptians did not offer true worship to Israel’s God. Yet, just as Abel offered sincere and acceptable sacrifices, so the Israelites sought the true worship of Yahweh. In this way, Moses established another association of Egypt with Cain, and of Israel with Abel.
A third way Moses created connections with Israel’s experience was through the motif of murder. Cain murdered his brother Abel, and the significance of this event becomes evident when we remember the murders of the Israelites that took place in Egypt. In Exodus 1–2 we read that the Egyptians not only overworked the Israelites, but actively murdered many of them, including their infant children. In this way Moses developed still more associations between Cain and the Egyptians, as well as between Abel and the Israelites.
A fourth way in which Moses created these associations was by describing Cain’s location on the earth. When God cursed Cain for murdering Abel, he banished Cain from the fertile land. As we read in Genesis 4:11-12:

> Now you are under a curse and driven from the ground... When you work the ground, it will no longer yield its crops for you (Genesis 4:11-12).

Cain was cursed to live in places where his farming would yield very little produce. This description of Cain’s location fit nicely with Moses’ assessment of the land of Egypt and of the land where he was taking Israel. Listen to the way Moses contrasted Canaan and Egypt in Deuteronomy 11:10-12:

> The land you are entering to take over is not like the land of Egypt, from which you have come, where you planted your seed and irrigated it by foot as in a vegetable garden. But the land you are crossing the Jordan to take possession of is a land of mountains and valleys that drinks rain from heaven. It is a land the Lord your God cares for (Deuteronomy 11:10-12).

God sent Cain to a place far from Eden, to a place like Egypt, where farming required much effort. This fact was another way in which Moses’ Israelite readers were to associate Cain with the Egyptians.
A fifth way in which Genesis 4–5 connected Cain with Egypt and Abel with Israel was in the theme of Cain’s protection. Even though Cain killed his brother Abel, God still protected him from harm. We read these words from God in Genesis 4:15:

> If anyone kills Cain, he will suffer vengeance seven times over (Genesis 4:15).

God protected Cain from harm even though he was a murderer. Once again, we see that Moses described these events so that Israel would associate them with their own experience in Egypt. God had given great protection to Egypt. Even though they were murderous and deserved divine judgment, for a long time God extended special protection to Egypt.
So, we see that in at least five ways Moses established meaningful parallels between this primeval period and Israel’s exodus experience. The themes of occupations, worship, murder, location, and protection all indicate that Moses wanted his Israelite readers to apply this story to their lives by associating Cain with the Egyptians, and by associating Abel with themselves as the people of God.
Now that we have seen the associations established in the story of sinful Cain, we should turn to the parallel narrative concerning righteous Seth in Genesis 4:25-26.
As we have seen, Moses made one significant comment about Seth and his son, Enosh. In Genesis 4:26 we read these words:

> At that time men began to call on the name of the Lord (Genesis 4:26).

Moses mentioned this fact about Seth and his son so that his readers would identify themselves not only with Abel, but also with Seth, Adam’s son who replaced Abel.
In the first place, Seth used the divine name Yahweh, and this use associated him with Israel. Interestingly enough, the book of Exodus makes it clear that the name Yahweh rose to prominence in the days of Moses. For example, God spoke to Moses in this way in Exodus 3:15:

> Say to the Israelites, “The Lord [in Hebrew, ‘Yahweh’], the God of your fathers — the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob — has sent me to you.” This is my name forever, the name by which I am to be remembered from generation to generation (Exodus 3:15).

Although the biblical record indicates that the name Yahweh was used from the time of Seth, during the time of Moses, this name became the principal name used for God. For this reason, faithful Israelites under Moses’ leadership would have associated themselves with righteous Seth. Like him, they also cherished the name Yahweh.
In the second place, the Israelites should have associated themselves with Seth through the theme of prayer. This motif also appears in Genesis 4:26 where Moses wrote that Seth’s family “began to call on the name of the Lord.” In the Old Testament, “to call on the name of the Lord” often meant to cry out for divine help in a time of trouble or need. In this light we can see that Moses drew a second connection to Israel in his own times. From the rest of the Pentateuch, we learn that in the Exodus from Egypt, Israel called on Yahweh for help during many crises, much like Seth and Enosh had called on him.
So we see that the Moses designed the narratives about sinful Cain and righteous Seth to form parallels with his contemporary world. He wanted his readers to notice that the Egyptians were like Cain. He also wanted his readers to see that they themselves were like Abel and Seth.
With these basic connections in mind we are in a position to turn to the genealogy of Cain and the genealogy of Seth.
Genealogies. As we will see, Moses also shaped these genealogies so that the Israelites would continue to associate the Egyptians with the wicked and themselves with the righteous. To further his main purpose, Genesis 4:17-24 characterizes the line of Cain in ways that drew indisputable associations with Egypt. These connections appear in at least six ways. First, Moses focused on Cain as a city builder. As he wrote in Genesis :4:17

> Cain was then building a city (Genesis 4:17).

Needless to say, the Israelites knew all too well that the Egyptians were great city builders — building cities for the Egyptians had been part of what the Israelites did as they were slaves in Egypt. For this reason, these words about Cain would have created strong associations with the Egyptians.
Second, we should also take note of the name of Cain’s city. Again, in Genesis 4:17, we read these words:

> Cain was then building a city, and he named it after his son Enoch (Genesis 4:17).

For Israelites in the days of Moses, this fact reminded them of an Egyptian practice. As Moses reported in Exodus 1:11:

> [The Egyptians] put slave masters over [the Israelites] to oppress them with forced labor, and they built Pithom and Rameses as store cities for Pharaoh (Exodus 1:11).

The city Rameses was named in honor of the Pharaoh Rameses. Just like Cain, the Egyptians also named cities after themselves for their own glory and honor. In this way, Cain’s genealogy established another connection between Cain and the Egyptians.
A third association between Cain’s line and Egypt appears in the pride which Cain’s descendant Lamech took in his act of murder. In 4:23 we read that Lamech actually sang a song of praise to himself before his wives:

> Adah and Zillah, listen to me; wives of Lamech, hear my words.I have killed a man for wounding me (Genesis 4:23).

Lamech’s boasting of his atrocities should also have associated Lamech with the Egyptians in the minds of ancient Israelites. The Israelites would have been quite aware that many ancient Egyptian inscriptions praised the Pharaohs and their armies for their murderous exploits.
A fourth association appears in Moses’ attention to the death of children. Listen again to what Lamech said. In 4:23 we read:

> I have killed a man for wounding me, a young man for injuring me (Genesis 4:23).

The Hebrew term translated “young man” here is yeled (יֶ ֶלד), which is often translated simply “boy.” One of Lamech’s victims was in all likelihood little more than a child. As we all know, in the first chapter of the book of Exodus, Pharaoh ordered the death of Israelite boys. Like Cain’s Lamech, the Egyptians struck out against the defenseless of Israel, against their male children.
A fifth association between Cain’s family and the Egyptians appears in Lamech’s claim to increased protection. In Genesis 4:24, Lamech claimed to enjoy even more protection than Cain:

>  If Cain is avenged seven times, then Lamech seventy-seven times (Genesis 4:24).

Just as Lamech thought that God protected him, the Pharaohs of Egypt were confident of protection from their gods. As a matter of fact, it had certainly appeared for many years that the Egyptians enjoyed more and more protection from harm.
In the sixth place, we should note the cultural sophistication of Cain’s line. Listen to the ways these three Cainite brothers, Jabal, Jubal, and Tubal-Cain are described in Genesis 4:20-22:

> Jabal ... was the father of those who live in tents and raise livestock... Jubal ... was the father of all who play the harp and flute... Tubal- Cain ... forged all kinds of tools out of bronze and iron (Genesis 4:20- 22).

With these words, Moses characterized Cain’s family as very sophisticated. Jabal was no mere shepherd; he invented animal husbandry. Jubal invented music, and Tubal-Cain invented sophisticated metallurgy. It would have been very difficult for Israelites in Moses’ day to have missed this connection. Compared to the simple, nomadic lifestyles of Israel’s patriarchs, the culture of Egypt was highly sophisticated. Moses described the sinful line of Cain this way to confirm the association he wanted his readers to make between Cain’s lineage and the Egyptians.
So we see that in at least six ways Moses drew connections between the Cainite genealogy and the Egyptians. His descriptions of city building, naming cities, pride in murder, violence against children, divine protection, and cultural sophistication in Cain’s family were designed to create these connections.
Now we should turn to the genealogy of Seth in Genesis 5:1-32. As we might expect, Moses constructed the Sethite genealogy so that his Israelite readers would identify themselves with Seth’s lineage. This association was built on at least four factors. In the first place, we should note that on a biological level, the nation of Israel descended from the line of Seth. In Genesis 5:32 we read the names of Noah’s three sons:

>  After Noah was 500 years old, he became the father of Shem, Ham and Japheth (Genesis 5:32).

The name Shem was particularly important to Moses because Shem was the ancestor of Israel. In modern languages we derive the term “Semitic” or “Semite” from the name Shem. Although other nations also came from the seed of Shem, the Israelites were God’s special chosen people, and they were from among the descendants of Shem.
So, in this simple biological sense, Moses connected his Israelite readers with Seth’s genealogy.
A second association between Seth’s line and Israel appears in the repeated focus on the righteousness of Seth’s descendants. Seth’s line is characterized as faithful and righteous. For instance, according to Genesis 5:24:

> Enoch walked with God; then he was no more (Genesis 5:24).

In the Hebrew Bible, the expression translated “walked with God” only occurs with reference to Enoch and Noah. Yet, time and again, especially in the book of Deuteronomy, Moses told Israel that they were to be like Enoch by walking in the ways of Yahweh. In this way, the faithful Israelites following Moses found another point of identification with the line of Seth. It was their goal to be like Enoch.
A third connection between Seth’s genealogy and Israel’s experience appears in Moses’ emphasis on the numbers of Sethites. In Seth’s genealogy, we learn that his descendants became quite numerous. Moses brought out the numerical increase of Seth’s family by repeating the fact that “other sons and daughters” were born to the Sethites. In fact he wrote this comment nine times in Genesis 5. This emphasis on numbers of people in Seth’s line was significant for Moses’ Israelite readers because they knew that God had greatly blessed them numerically while in Egypt and during the Exodus.
In the fourth place, Moses also stressed the long lives that many Sethites enjoyed in order to connect Israel with the Sethites. For example, we all know that Seth’s descendant Methuselah lived longer than anyone in biblical history. According to Genesis 5:27, he lived 969 years. Many other Sethites lived long lives as well. Moses’ attention to the long lives of Seth’s line was important because, as the law of Moses indicates, long life in the Land of Promise was to be the goal of the faithful in Israel. By pointing out the long lives of Seth’s descendants, Moses drew another connection between the Sethites and Israel.
So it is that Moses wrote about the early violence and hope of deliverance in the primeval history in order to draw firm associations with his contemporary world. Cain and his descendants were to be connected with the Egyptians who inflicted violence on Israel. And Abel, Seth, and Seth’s descendants were to be connected with the Israelites who were victims of Egyptian violence. These associations were at the heart of Moses’ strategy in this portion of his history.
Now that we have seen how Moses handled his record of early violence and hope, we should turn briefly to Genesis 6:1-8 — later violence and the hope of deliverance.
