# OLD TESTAMENT NARRATIVES
The Book of Joshua
The Book of Samuel 

## Course description

The book of Joshua covers the period of Israel's history from the conquest of Canaan to just after Joshua's death. Although certain events in the book can leave modern audiences feeling more than a little uncomfortable, it helps to remember that God promised to be with Joshua in all that he did, especially in leading the Israelites into the Promised Land. The books of Samuel report Israel's history from the birth of Samuel through the reign of King David. It would be difficult to overestimate the importance of this century in the development of God's kingdom. When the prophet Samuel was born, Israel was in disarray under the failing leadership of the Judges and Levites. But by the time David delivered his last words, God had made an everlasting covenant with him and established David's house as the permanent dynasty over his people. This course teaches about the background, purpose, contents, and application of the books of Joshua and Samuel. It is based on the lecture series, The Book of Joshua and The Book of Samuel, produced by Third Millennium Ministries and hosted by Dr. Seth Tarrer and Dr. Thaddeus J. James, Jr. with contributions from a variety of professors.

## GOALS AND OBJECTIVES

### Goals

In this course, we would like to accomplish the following:

We hope that you will make use of all the instructional elements of the course to learn about the background, purpose, contents, and application of the books of Joshua and Samuel.
We hope you will grow in your trust in the Lord and in your commitment to Him, as you learn from the history and teachings of the books of Joshua and Samuel.
We hope you become convinced of the value of the studying the books of Joshua and Samuel and grow in your interest in teaching from them.
We hope you make changes in your life as a response to the teachings of this course. It should help you interpret and apply passages from the whole Bible.

### Objectives

When you have done the following, it will show that the goals are met:

Obtain satisfactory grades on the test and quizzes of the course, showing that you can identify the following: a) the important information about the background, purpose and design of the books of Joshua and Samuel, b) the primary events in the lives of the people in these books, and c) the original meaning and Christian application of these Old Testament narrative books.
Participate in weekly discussions that both review and reflect up on the teachings of the Thirdmill videos, in order to more fully understand the concepts and apply them to your life and ministry.

