# The Pentateuch 
### Lesson Nine
### The Patriarch Jacob

## INTRODUCTION
 
Have you ever known people who are so deceitful they seem to be beyond hope? Their deception and dishonesty might benefit them — at least in the short run — often making them even worse. But happily, when God wants to use such people in special ways, they aren’t beyond his reach. God will bring hardships into their lives to humble them and to shape them into the kinds of people who are ready to serve him. And more
often than not, those that God reaches in these ways end up becoming models of humility and faith for others.
This lesson is devoted to a portion of the Pentateuch that focuses on one of the most deceitful men in the Bible, “The Patriarch Jacob.” But, as we’ll see, this portion of Genesis from 25:19–37:1, not only reveals how Jacob was deceitful, but also how God humbled and shaped him into one of the most admired patriarchs of Israel.
In other lessons, we’ve seen that the book of Genesis can be divided into three major sections. The first section is the primeval history in 1:1–11:9. Here Moses explained how Israel’s call to the Promised Land was rooted in what happened in the earliest stages of world history. The second section covers the earlier patriarchal history in 11:10–37:1. In this section, Moses clarified how the journey to the Promised Land was to be viewed against the backdrop of the lives of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. The third section is the later patriarchal history in 37:2–50:26. In these verses, Moses told the story of Joseph and his brothers to address issues that had emerged among the tribes of Israel as they moved toward the Promised Land.
The record of the patriarch Jacob is a part of the second division; the earlier patriarchal history that deals with Israel’s three well-known patriarchs: Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. The events of Isaac’s life are woven into both the record of Abraham in 11:10–25:18, and also into the record of Jacob in 25:19–37:1. So, in this lesson, we’ll focus on the second half of this division: the life of Jacob.
Our lesson on the patriarch Jacob will divide into two main parts. First, we’ll examine the structure and content of this portion of Genesis. Then we’ll look at the major themes Moses emphasized for his original audience, and how these themes apply to modern Christians. Let’s begin by looking at the structure and content of Jacob’s story.

## STRUCTURE AND CONTENT
 
Most students of the Bible are familiar with the events of Jacob’s life. But at this point in our lesson, we want to see how Moses organized the record of these events in the book of Genesis. Keep in mind that, when we read the Scriptures, we must ask both what they say and how they say it. In other words, how do the content and structure of every passage work together? Understanding this relationship helps us discern biblical authors’ purposes for their original audiences. And it helps us know how we should apply their texts in our modern world.
There are many ways to outline a portion of Scripture as long and complex as Genesis 25:19–37:1. But, for our purposes, we’ll identify seven major divisions of the account of Jacob’s life.
* The first division is what we may call the beginning of struggle in Genesis 25:19-34. It raises the dramatic problem of the struggle between Jacob and Esau, and subsequently the nations that descended from them. This struggle rises and falls in intensity throughout the account of Jacob’s life. The end of this first division is marked by a shift away from Jacob and Esau to their father, Isaac, as the protagonist.
* The second division turns to peaceful encounters between Isaac and Philistines in 26:1-33. This division ends with a shift back to Esau and Jacob as the main characters.
* The third division deals with Jacob and Esau’s hostile separation in 26:34– 28:22. This division ends with Jacob’s move toward Laban and his relatives outside the Promised Land.
* The fourth division describes Jacob’s time with Laban in 29:1–31:55. This division ends as Jacob returns to the Promised Land.
* The fifth division reports Jacob and Esau’s peaceful separation after Jacob had returned to the Promised Land in 32:1–33:17. This division then shifts away from Esau to Jacob’s dealings with Canaanite opponents.
* The sixth division focuses on encounters between Jacob and Canaanites in 33:18–35:15. At the end of this division, attention moves to Jacob’s lineage.
* Finally, the seventh division of Jacob’s life tells about the end of struggle for the brothers in 35:16–37:1.
A number of commentators have noted that this basic outline of the life of Jacob forms a large-scale chiasm:

>  A literary structure in which sections before and after a centerpiece parallel or balance each other.
Any time you talk about the outline of a section or a part of the Old Testament you have to keep in mind, that with rare exception, biblical writers did not write their stories, or their poems and the like, with an
outline in mind. As if, “Now I’m on part one. Now I’m on part two. Now I’m on part three.” Instead, what we’re talking about is interpreters looking at texts that were written and finding patterns that are identifiable, which means then that every outline is using certain criteria to analyze the structure and the logical connections. And depending on what criteria you use, you’re going to come up with different outlines. Well, one of the criteria that you can use is that of balance, or echo, or reflection, or parallels between earlier sections and later sections ... but when you find even more detailed parallels — say, between the first section and the last section as in the case of Jacob — then you come to the point where, if you have enough of these parallels, you could actually call it an "intentional chiasm," where the writer is thinking in terms of, “ I’ve done this. I’ve done this. I’ve done this in the first part; now I’m going to do these things that have rough correlations back to the earlier part” ... and because of those correlations that come out in that kind of a structure, you have the opportunity then to compare and contrast the correlating sections. And that’s what’s valuable when it comes to the story of Jacob. The early parts of Jacob’s life correlate to later parts of Jacob’s life. And when you see those correlations — which involve both contrasts and comparisons — when you see both of those together and they pop up between these various sections, then you have the opportunity to see what Moses as the author is emphasizing in both of those sections. Comparisons and contrasts, that’s the key for understanding the significance of a chiasm. — Dr. Richard L. Pratt, Jr.

As we’ve just noted, the first division in the story of Jacob recounts the beginning of struggle for brothers Jacob and Esau. This section is balanced by the seventh and final division where we read about the end of their struggle. Both divisions deal with the struggle between not only the brothers, but also the nations that descended from them.
The second division focuses on Isaac and his interactions with Philistines. It corresponds to the sixth division where we see Jacob and his interactions with Canaanites. These divisions balance each other because they both describe encounters that took place between the patriarchs and other groups in the Promised Land. The third division records Jacob and Esau’s hostile separation. It balances with the fifth division regarding Jacob and Esau’s peaceful separation. Clearly, both divisions focus on the dynamics surrounding the times when the brothers parted ways. And finally, the fourth division looks at Jacob’s time with Laban. This division stands alone as the center, or hinge, of the chiastic structure. As such, it forms a turning point in the drama of Jacob’s story.
Keeping this overarching symmetrical design in mind, we’ll examine the content of Moses’ account by comparing and contrasting each paired division. For the sake of convenience, we’ll start with the two outermost divisions and work our way toward the
central division. Let’s look first at the beginning of the brothers’ struggle in Genesis 25:19-34.

### BEGINNING OF STRUGGLE (GENESIS 25:19-34)

This section consists of three simple episodes that show how the struggle between the brothers began. The first episode takes place before the twins’ birth, in 25:19-23. It reports that the twins fought in their mother’s womb. Listen to Genesis 25:23, where God explained this prenatal struggle to Rebekah:

> Two nations are in your womb, and two peoples from within you will be separated; one people will be stronger than the other, and the older will serve the younger (Genesis 25:23).

As we see, God said that the struggle between Jacob and Esau was much more than a personal struggle between two brothers. It anticipated a struggle between “two nations” or “two peoples.” So, what two nations did God have in mind? We find the answer in the second and third episodes of this section.
The second episode tells us about the brothers’ struggle at birth in 25:24-26. This short passage gives us the first identification of the two nations referred to earlier. Genesis 25:25 describes the firstborn child, Esau, as “red” at birth. The Hebrew term translated “red” is ַא ְדמוֹ ִ֔ני (admoni). This terminology represents a subtle play on words because it derives from the same family of Hebrew terms as the word ֱאדוֹם or Edom. This indicated that Esau was the ancestor of the nation of Edom. We learn of the second nation in Genesis 25:26, where the second son is called Jacob. Jacob, of course, was the well- known father of the nation of Israel.
The third episode reports on the rivalry between Jacob and Esau as young adults in 25:27-34. In these verses, Jacob enticed Esau to exchange his birthright for “red stew,” or ָא ֹדם (adōm) in Hebrew. This Hebrew word echoes the earlier “red” color of Esau himself at his birth. And Genesis 25:30 explicitly notes that this is why Esau was also called “Edom.”
As we’ve just seen, from the outset Moses provided his audience with a crucial orientation toward his account. His audience was about to learn of what happened between Jacob and his brother Esau. But this struggle was much more than a struggle merely between two brothers. These two brothers were the heads of two nations, Israel and Edom, and as such, their personal struggle foreshadowed the struggle between their descendants in these two nations.

> When we think about the diplomatic relations, the political intersection, interface between Israel and Edom ... it’s a relationship that is not a happy one... Even when they’re in the womb of Rebekah, right? They’re fighting and then one is trying to supplant the other. Of course, Esau comes out first; so he is the firstborn. But Jacob is right behind him and he wants to supplant him, which is his name. Jacob is “the supplanter,” right? “The one who supplants.” And so, that’s the backdrop. And then, very young — two very different temperaments — Jacob likes to hang out in the tent and eat and stay at home and Esau is the hunter, right? But Jacob wants what Esau has, which is the inheritance of the firstborn. So he cooks him a meal. He comes home from the field very hungry and he makes this stupid deal with his brother. And Jacob says to Esau, “You know what? I’m just gonna make you a nice meal and you can give me your inheritance.” The guy is so hungry, he says, “Sure, I’ll do it.” And then he realizes what’s happened and then he wants the blessing from his father. And now, in cahoot with his own mom, Jacob pretends to be Esau. And Esau is the, you know, the “He-Man” — hairy, everything, right? And so, he puts some skins on his arms and goes in and pretends to be Esau and asks for the blessing from the patriarch of the family. And Isaac says, “Okay, you can have the blessing.” And so, all the way, Esau is being stolen out of his inheritance. And so, of course it creates bad blood. And then Jacob has to leave because he’s going to get murdered by his brother. So, that is not a good relationship between the two brothers... And then this gets amplified when they become nation-states; they hate each other. And they have the history to prove it. — Dr. Tom Petter

This focus on Jacob, Esau and their descendants in the first division helps us understand the seventh or last division, the end of struggle for the brothers in 35:16–37:1.

### END OF STRUGGLE (GENESIS 35:16–37:1)

In this division, Moses focused once again on Jacob and Esau and the two nations they represented. He did this in three parts. First, he recorded Jacob’s lineage in Genesis 35:16-26. This section elaborates on how Jacob’s descendants formed the nation of Israel. It includes short notes about Benjamin and Reuben and ends with a list of the patriarchs of Israel’s twelve tribes.
Second, Moses described the behavior of Jacob and Esau at Isaac’s death in Genesis 35:27-29. This short passage reports that both Esau and Jacob buried Isaac. The poignancy of this report becomes clear when we recall that in Genesis 27:41 Esau threatened to kill Jacob as soon as their father died. In this light, the description of Isaac’s death points out that the struggle between the brothers was over.
Third, Moses gave a detailed account of Esau’s lineage in Genesis 36:1-43. This account combines two genealogies that report various segments of Esau’s line. The section ends with the kings who ruled in the region of Seir. Then Moses added an afterword in 37:1 explaining that Jacob continued to live in the land of Canaan. By ending Esau’s lineage in this way, Moses made it clear that, although the struggle between Jacob and Esau had ended, the brothers had separated. The descendants of Jacob
lived in Canaan and the descendants of Esau lived in Edom.
With the content of the first and last divisions of Jacob’s life in mind, let’s move
one step closer to the center of Moses’ account, to the second and sixth divisions that deal with the patriarchs’ encounters in the Promised Land.

### ISAAC AND PHILISTINES (GENESIS 26:1-33)

These divisions contrast peaceful encounters between Isaac and Philistines, in Genesis 26:1-33, with hostile encounters between Jacob and Canaanites in Genesis 33:18–35:15. We’ll start with the second division that describes Isaac and his encounters with Philistines.
Now, many critical interpreters have argued that this chapter of Genesis is out of place. We can all see that it focuses on Isaac instead of Jacob. And it may very well be true that these events took place before the births of Jacob and Esau. But as we’ll see, this division is vital to Moses’ focus on Jacob’s life.
This material divides into two closely related episodes. The first episode describes Isaac’s initial peace with the Philistines in 26:1-11. In these verses, Isaac deceived the
Philistine king, Abimelech, into thinking that Rebekah was his sister. Upon discovering Isaac’s deceit, Abimelech returned Rebekah to Isaac. He then gave Isaac permission to stay in the region and ordered his people not to harm them in any way.
The second episode reports Isaac’s enduring peace with the Philistines in 26:12- 33. In this section, God blessed Isaac but his many flocks and herds caused the Philistines to envy him. So, Isaac avoided violence by moving from well to well. The episode closes as Abimelech acknowledged God’s blessing on Isaac and the two made a treaty of peace between them at Beersheba.
This narrative of Isaac’s peace with Philistines highlights the fact that Isaac, and in turn his son Jacob, were Abraham’s successors. When we compare the content of this division with the life of Abraham, we find a number of parallels to Abraham’s life. Abraham dealt with a Philistine king, also named Abimelech, in Genesis 20:1-18. Abraham dug wells and lived among the Philistines in Genesis 21:30 and 34. Abraham also entered into a treaty with the Philistines at Beersheba in Genesis 21:22-34. Moses designed these comparisons with Abraham to remove all doubt that God approved Isaac’s peaceful relationship with the Philistines.
Now let’s turn from Isaac’s interactions with Philistines to the sixth division of Jacob’s life that focuses on encounters between Jacob and Canaanites in 33:18–35:15.

### JACOB AND CANAANITES (GENESIS 33:18–35:15)

Jacob’s conflict with Canaanites also consists of two closely connected episodes. The first episode concerns Jacob’s conflict at Shechem in 33:18–34:31. While Jacob was among the Canaanites, Shechem son of Hamor violated Jacob’s daughter, Dinah. In
response to this attack on their sister, Jacob’s sons tricked the Shechemites into believing all would be forgiven if they would be circumcised. But once the Shechemites were disabled by their circumcisions, Jacob’s sons Simeon and Levi attacked and killed them all. Afterwards, Jacob expressed fear that the Canaanites would seek revenge and destroy his family. Even though Jacob’s sons insisted that they had done the right thing, Jacob’s final words about Simeon and Levi in Genesis 49:5-7 indicate otherwise.
In the second episode, Jacob received a dramatic assurance from God at Bethel in Genesis 35:1-15. In 35:2-4, Jacob consecrated himself and his entire family to God in preparation for building an altar at Bethel. As a result, the terror of God fell on the Canaanites and they didn’t pursue Jacob. Then, after Jacob built the altar at Bethel, God spoke to him and assured him that he was his father’s successor. We see this particularly in 35:10-12 where God’s words parallel his earlier words to Isaac in 26:3-4. The episode closes with Jacob giving thanks for this blessing.
And much like in the second division, we see several parallels between Abraham and Jacob in these chapters. In Genesis 33:20, Jacob set up an altar to the Lord in Shechem much like Abraham had done before him in Genesis 12:7. Moreover, in 35:6-7, Jacob moved from Shechem to Bethel and built an altar there much like Abraham had done in Genesis 12:8. As in the second division, these positive connections to Abraham’s life showed that God approved of Jacob’s conflict with the Canaanites.
Now let’s turn to the third and fifth divisions that deal with Jacob and Esau’s
times of separation. These narratives focus on two distinct times when the brothers parted ways. The third division describes Jacob and Esau’s hostile separation in 26:34–28:22. And the fifth division describes Jacob and Esau’s peaceful separation in Genesis 32:1– 33:17. Let’s look at Jacob and Esau’s hostile separation.

### HOSTILE SEPARATION (GENESIS 26:34–28:22)

This section focuses on four accounts that alternate between Esau and Jacob to display the moral complexities of these events. First, 26:34 gives a brief report that Esau discredited himself by taking Hittite wives against his parents’ wishes. Second, in 27:1– 28:5, we read a lengthy narrative of how Jacob’s deception secured Isaac’s blessing. In this well-known story, Jacob secured the blessing that was meant for Esau by deceiving his father Isaac. Upon learning what had happened, Esau became so enraged that Rebekah feared for Jacob’s life. She convinced Isaac to send Jacob to Paddan Aram where Jacob might find a wife from among their relatives. Third, to keep the audience from feeling too much sympathy for Esau, Moses reported in 28:6-9 that Esau took Ishmaelite wives in defiance of his parents. The fourth and last segment affirms God’s choice of Jacob as Isaac’s heir by reporting Jacob’s blessing through a dream at Bethel in 28:10-22.
