### PEACEFUL SEPARATION (GENESIS 32:1–33:17)

In contrast to the third division’s narrative of Jacob and Esau’s hostile separation,
the fifth division of Jacob’s life reports the brothers’ peaceful separation in 32:1–33:17. This division involves two closely connected episodes. First, we see Jacob’s preparation for Esau in 32:1-32. Years after their hostile separation, Jacob prepared to meet Esau by sending messengers and gifts ahead of him. According to Hosea 12:4, the night before meeting Esau, Jacob was humbled as he wrestled with an angel and received God’s blessing.

> We see that the promise had already been made to Rebekah that Jacob would be the one who would receive the blessing but the way that Jacob went about getting the blessing ... he deceived his father and he, when he was asked his name, he said, “My name is Esau, your firstborn.” He lied... But God blesses him; God multiplies, gives him all the children so that the promise to Abraham is beginning to be fulfilled — “As the stars are, so shall your seed be” — and yet, when he’s coming back to the Promised Land, he has to face up to his past. And this time, the night before he’s to meet Esau, he’s wrestling with an angel and he’s asked, “What is your name?” And this time he tells the truth. He says, “My name is Jacob.” And he’s given a new name, Israel. — Dr. Craig S. Keener

The second episode in 33:1-17 reports Jacob’s reconciliation with Esau. In this section, the brothers meet and then part on peaceful terms. The contrasts between this division and its parallel are obvious. Jacob was no longer deceitful but sincere and humble. Esau no longer sought revenge but granted forgiveness. In the end, the earlier hostility between the twins took a turn toward resolution and they went their separate ways in peace. This division ends as Esau disappears from the storyline. Then, in chapter 34, Canaanites and a new geographical setting appear. All of this brings us to the fourth, pivotal division of Jacob’s time with Laban in Genesis 29:1–31:55.

### TIME WITH LABAN (GENESIS 29:1–31:55)

Jacob’s time with Laban divides into five main segments. It begins in 29:1-14 with Jacob’s arrival in Paddan Aram. We then learn in 29:14-30 of Laban’s deception of Jacob as he gave Jacob his daughters in marriage. Following Jacob’s marriages, in 29:31– 30:24 we read of the births of Jacob’s children, the tribal patriarchs of Israel. Then, to balance Laban’s earlier deception, in 30:25-43 Moses reported Jacob’s deception of Laban as he sought wages for his years of work. Finally, in 31:1-55, we find Jacob’s departure from Paddan Aram, including a covenant of peace made with Laban. These pivotal chapters deal with a variety of deceptions and conflicts. But, as we’ll see in a moment, they brought about a radical transformation in Jacob.

> When we look at the Jacob narrative in Genesis 25–37, we see a remarkable series of transformations that took place in Jacob’s life. As he begins, as the deceiver, then he has that amazing gracious revelation from God in which God does not refer to the deception that Jacob has practiced but instead renews all the promises of Abraham to him. And Jacob becomes the dealer as he makes a deal with God that, if God will keep those promises, he will give him a little cut. But what a deal it was because God kept his promises when Jacob met a man who was crookeder than Jacob was in the person of Laban. And as Jacob senses God's blessing in his life, it’s very clear that he becomes more and more willing to trust God — at least in minimal ways — so that when God says to head home, he’s willing to do it. And finally then, the deceiver, the dealer is defeated when he hears the word that his brother is coming with all those armed men. And then the defeated is delivered when God comes and Jacob says, “It’s your blessing I have to have — not my father’s, not Esau’s. It’s yours!” And ultimately then, in this way, he’s brought to the place where he is willing and able to trust God and no longer needs to be the manipulator who makes everything work for himself.
— Dr. John Oswalt

Up to this point in our lesson on the patriarch Jacob, we’ve explored the structure and content of Jacob’s life in the book of Genesis. Now we should turn to our second main topic: the major themes that appear in these chapters.

## MAJOR THEMES
 
Unfortunately, followers of Christ often act as if Jacob’s story was written primarily for individual believers to apply directly to their personal lives. Of course, this part of Genesis has much to say about how individuals should live. But we always have to remember that Genesis was not written with the expectation that the average individual believer would be able to read it. Only the leaders of ancient Israel had direct access to the Scriptures. So, the life of Jacob was primarily written to address matters related to the nation of Israel as a whole. God had set Israel on a mission to build his kingdom in the Promised Land. And from there they were to spread his kingdom to the ends of the earth. And this kingdom-building mission helps us identify the major themes of Jacob’s life for ancient Israel and for you and me living in Christ’s kingdom today.
In our lessons on the life of Abraham, we saw that Moses emphasized four main themes: God’s grace to Abraham, Abraham’s loyalty to God, God’s blessings to Abraham and God’s blessings through Abraham to others. These same themes appear again in the life of Jacob. For this reason, we’ll consider how the story of Jacob’s life emphasizes these four major themes. First, we’ll discuss God’s grace to Israel; second,
the requirement of Israel’s loyalty to God; third, God’s blessings to Israel; and fourth, the most important feature of these chapters, God’s blessings through Israel to others. Let’s begin with some of the ways Jacob’s story focuses on God’s grace to Israel.

### GOD’S GRACE TO ISRAEL

We’ll explore God’s grace to Israel in two ways. On the one hand, we’ll see how this theme was a focus of Moses’ original meaning, how he wanted to impact his ancient Israelite audience. On the other hand, we’ll note some of the ways the theme of divine grace should affect our modern application of this part of Genesis. Let’s look first at Moses’ original meaning.

#### Original Meaning

In general terms, to teach the people of Israel about God’s grace in their own
lives, Moses stressed divine grace in Jacob’s life in three ways.
Past Grace. First, Moses noted how God had shown Jacob past grace even before he was born. The opening episode of Jacob’s story draws attention to this theme. Listen again to Genesis 25:23 where God said to Rebekah:

> Two nations are in your womb, and two peoples from within you will be separated; one people will be stronger than the other, and the older will serve the younger (Genesis 25:23).

In Romans 9:11-12, the apostle Paul made the comment that Jacob received God’s mercy even before he had done anything right or wrong. In much the same way, God’s favor to the tribes of Israel that were following Moses toward the Promised Land also rested on God’s mercies in the past. In Deuteronomy 7:7-8, Moses put it this way:

> The Lord did not set his affection on you and choose you because you were more numerous than other peoples ... But it was because the Lord loved you and kept the oath he swore to your forefathers that he brought you out with a mighty hand and redeemed you from the land of slavery (Deuteronomy 7:7-8).

Ongoing Grace. In the second place, Moses also highlighted the need for God’s ongoing grace in Jacob’s life. This taught the Israelites how much they needed God’s ongoing grace in their own lives. This focus first appears in the account of Jacob’s birth in Genesis 25:24-26. Listen to Genesis 25:26:

> After this, his brother came out, with his hand grasping Esau’s heel; so he was named Jacob (Genesis 25:26).

Jacob received his name because he was "grasping Esau’s heel" as they were born. The name Jacob, ַי ֲע ֹ֑ ֹקב (yacob) in Hebrew, is from the same root as the word translated here “heel,” or ָע ֵקב (akeeb) in Hebrew. In effect, Jacob’s name meant, “he grabs the heel.” But, in this case, his name had connotations of subversion and deception because Jacob tried to gain the position of firstborn as early as the day of his birth. We might even say that the name Jacob meant something like “the trickster.” This explains Esau’s reaction in Genesis 27:36 after Jacob had tricked Isaac into giving him Esau’s blessing:

>  Esau said, “Isn’t he rightly named Jacob? He has deceived me these two times: He took my birthright, and now he’s taken my blessing!” (Genesis 27:36).

Jacob’s name aptly matched his actions and made it clear that he needed God’s ongoing grace every day of his life. Moses often drew attention to displays of God’s ongoing grace that were particularly relevant for his original audience.
By way of illustration, in Genesis 26:26-33, God showed mercy to Jacob’s father, Isaac, by giving him safety among Philistines. When Moses wrote these chapters, his Israelite audience also needed God’s grace to secure their own protection from the Philistines. In addition to this, in 34:1-31, God graciously gave Jacob victory over Canaanites. By this example, Moses’ original audience learned how they needed God’s ongoing grace to give them victory over Canaanites in their own day.
 
Future Grace. In the third place, the story of Jacob also focuses on God’s future grace. Once again, we see this theme first in the opening episodes of Moses’ account. As you’ll recall, in Genesis 25:23, before Jacob’s birth, God promised:

>  One people will be stronger than the other, and the older will serve the younger (Genesis 25:23).

This promise indicated that the Israelites would be so well established in the Promised Land that they would extend their rule — and thus God’s rule — over the land of Esau’s descendants as well. And this promise of future grace was particularly relevant for Moses’ original audience as they dealt with Edomites in their own day.
And God made a number of other promises of future grace in the story of Jacob’s life. For example, in Jacob’s dream at Bethel in Genesis 28:10-22, God assured Jacob of many future mercies. And later, God reaffirmed similar promises of grace in Jacob’s worship at Bethel in 35:11-12. These promises of future grace to Jacob showed Moses’ audience the bright future that God offered them as they moved toward the conquest and settlement of Canaan.

> To understand how the stories of Jacob emphasize that Israel has a right to the Promised Land, we have to remember at least two different things. One is that these stories are primarily about the contrast between Jacob and Esau — groups that would have been competing, as it were, as the rightful heirs of Abraham’s promises. And the stories of Jacob and Esau, the contrast between them shows very plainly that Esau went south toward the Edomites and that God gave him that land — that that’s where God established him — and that Jacob, rather, is the rightful heir of the promise given to Abraham for the Promised Land. But you can also find it in the story of Laban when Jacob leaves. These are northern neighbors, relatives of his, but he doesn’t stay there but for a period of time. But more important than just these contrasts, between Jacob/Esau, Jacob and Laban, is the fact that as Jacob is leaving the Promised Land, having deceived his father, deceived his brother; he’s leaving the Promised Land. In chapter 28, he has that well-known dream at Bethel where he finds God and the angels appearing to him and then Jacob says, “Will you please just assure me that I am going to come back to this land?” And God does assure him that he will do just that. And then in chapter 35, you have a recollection of that event where God says, “Go to Bethel; build an altar. Build an altar at the place that I told you I would bring you back to.” And Bethel, as we know, is in the Promised Land. And those two passages in the life of Jacob positively emphasize the idea that this is the land that God had given to Jacob despite all of his failings, despite that he deceived his brother, deceived his father, even did things up in the land of Laban that were questionable. Despite all of that, God chose Jacob as the one who would inherit the land that had been promised to his forefather Abraham.    — Dr. Richard L. Pratt, Jr.

 Now that we’ve looked at God’s grace to Israel with the original meaning in mind, let’s touch on some of the ways God’s grace should affect the modern application of Jacob’s story.
 
#### Modern Application

Of course, there are countless ways to apply the theme of God’s grace to our lives as followers of Christ. But for the sake of convenience, we’ll think in terms of the inauguration of Christ’s kingdom, the continuation of his kingdom throughout church history, and the consummation of the kingdom at his return in glory. These three stages of Christ’s kingdom represent some of the main ways the New Testament teaches Christ’s followers to find God’s past, ongoing and future grace in their lives.
In the first place, as followers of Christ, when we see displays of past grace in Jacob’s life, we should recall how God revealed his past grace to us especially in the
inauguration of his kingdom in Christ. The first advent of Christ stands at the end of a long history of grace that ran throughout all of the Old Testament. And as passages like Romans 5:20 indicate, God showed more grace and mercy in the first advent of Christ than ever before. As Paul put it: 

> Where sin increased, grace increased all the more (Romans 5:20).

In the second place, God’s ongoing grace in Jacob’s life reminds us to seek and depend on God’s ongoing mercies during the continuation of Christ’s kingdom. As passages like Hebrews 4:16 tell us, Christ’s followers can “approach [God’s] throne of grace with confidence.” And we’ll “find ongoing grace to help us in our time of need.”
And third, when we see God’s assurances of future grace to Jacob, we should remember God’s future grace for us that will appear at the consummation of Christ’s kingdom. Much like Moses’ original audience learned about God’s future grace in the Promised Land, followers of Christ long to see God’s promises fulfilled in the new creation. Passages like Ephesians 2:7 remind us that, at Christ’s return, we’ll experience “the incomparable riches of [God’s] grace.”

### ISRAEL’S LOYALTY TO GOD

Now that we’ve touched on the major theme of God’s grace to Israel, we should turn to the second major theme: the requirement of Israel’s loyalty to God. Both the Old and New Testaments make it clear that eternal salvation is granted entirely by the grace of God. No one has ever been able to gain salvation by works. But the Scriptures also make it clear that when people receive the saving grace of God, God’s Spirit begins to transform them, and they seek to obey God’s commands out of heartfelt gratitude for his many mercies. This is the fruit of God’s Spirit within us. As we look at the theme of loyalty to God in Jacob’s life, we must always keep these basic theological outlooks in mind.
To see what we mean, we’ll look at Israel’s loyalty to God as a facet of Moses’ original meaning and then move toward the modern application of this theme. Let’s consider first Moses’ original meaning.

#### Original Meaning

In general terms, Moses stressed Jacob’s loyalty to God to call his original audience to be loyal to God in their own day. One of the most obvious ways Moses did this was to point out how God transformed Jacob into his loyal servant. In the early divisions of Jacob’s story, the patriarch is largely portrayed in a negative light. Jacob’s birth depicts him as grasping his brother’s heel, and thus trying to grasp the position of the firstborn. In his young adulthood, we learn that Jacob took advantage of Esau’s hunger to secure Esau’s birthright for himself. He also deceived his aged father to get the
blessing reserved for Esau. The only exception to this early negative characterization is Jacob’s vow at Bethel where he swore that if God would protect him, the Lord would be his God.
Now, following this vow, Jacob went to live with Laban. Apparently, the seed of loyalty to God sown in Jacob’s heart at Bethel must have continued to grow. Despite being mistreated by his father-in-law, when Jacob returned from his time with Laban, he became a new man.
Moses made this transformation evident in at least four ways. First, Moses reported that Jacob showed contrition toward Esau. In 32:4-5, Jacob instructed his servant to address Esau on his behalf as “my master.” And when Jacob himself finally met Esau in Genesis 33:8, he directly addressed him as “my lord.”
Second, Jacob showed contrition toward God. For instance, in Genesis 32:10 Jacob confessed to God:

> I am unworthy of all the kindness and faithfulness you have shown your servant (Genesis 32:10).

Third, Jacob received a new name from God. In Genesis 32:22-32, Jacob wrestled with an angel at the ford of the Jabbok River. In verse 27, Jacob essentially confessed to the angel that he’d been a “trickster” by admitting that his name was Jacob. But the angel responded to Jacob’s confession in Genesis 32:28 by saying:

> Your name will no longer be Jacob, but Israel, because you have struggled with God and with men and have overcome (Genesis 32:28).

Like so many other names in the Bible, the name י ְש ָר ֵ ֹ֑אל (Israel) was, at some point in its history, a praise to God meaning, “God struggles" or "fights.” It derives from the Hebrew verb ָש ָרה (sarah), which is translated in verse 28 as “you have struggled.” The angel explained that this name applied to Jacob in a special way because he had “struggled with God and with men and [had] overcome.” Jacob’s struggle with God refers to his wrestling for a blessing in this very scene. And, in all likelihood, Jacob’s struggle with men refers to his struggles with Esau and Laban. In terms of Jacob’s life, his new name indicated that he was a new man. Rather than remaining a trickster, Jacob had become “Israel,” one who had struggled and had overcome.

> You read in the book of Genesis the interesting story of Jacob’s name being changed by God himself to Israel. Jacob had wrestled an angel and he realized that that angel represented God; it was the Angel of God. And he realized that God had a special plan for him. God had paid attention to him, had visited him, had a purpose for him that was very, very significant. And so, he got his name changed... In ancient Israel, we know that people did not name babies until they were born. They didn’t name them in advance. They didn’t say, if it’s a boy we’ll give him this name, and if it’s a girl we’ll give her that name. Instead, what they did was to wait for some kind of signal, some kind of sign, some kind of indication. Now, this had happened to Jacob when he was born because he was grabbing on — when he came out of the womb — to his brother Esau’s heel. So, he got a name, "Yakov" in Hebrew, that means “heeler” or “holder of the heel,” or “heel-type person.” And he carried that through his life... But he was really in a new life when God met him. When God got ahold of Jacob and gave him that sense of his real purpose, that he would be the father of a nation, in an even more direct way than his own father Isaac or his own grandfather Abraham were — a very direct way... And so that change from Jacob to Israel is really a beautiful thing and we appreciate God's role in it, in calling the immediate father of the nation of Israel to serve him and to produce the children that he would use to form his first people on the earth.     — Dr. Douglas Stuart

It would be difficult to overestimate the significance of Jacob’s new name for Moses’ original audience. “Israel” was the national name of the twelve tribes Moses led from Egypt to the Promised Land. When they heard of the patriarch’s new name as God’s loyal servant, they were reminded that, being Israel, they were called to struggle and
overcome just as Jacob had.
A fourth, positive depiction of Jacob, after his time with Laban, was his sincere
worship when he returned to Bethel. Just as he promised loyalty to God at Bethel in Genesis 28:20-21, Jacob built an altar and worshipped the Lord in all sincerity at Bethel in Genesis 35:3.
Moses’ account of Jacob’s transformation had two chief implications for his original audience. He presented Jacob’s disloyalty because his audience needed to face the many ways they had been disloyal to God. But he also presented Jacob’s transformation into a loyal servant of God to encourage his audience to imitate Jacob’s loyalty in their own day. And as much as Moses’ original audience needed to rely on God’s grace, they also needed to commit themselves to loyal service to God as they faced the challenges of life in the Promised Land.
Now that we’ve observed the theme of Israel’s loyalty to God with regard to Moses’ original meaning, we should look at this theme as a facet of our modern application of Jacob’s life. For our purposes, we’ll turn once again to how this dimension of Jacob’s life also applies to us in terms of the inauguration, continuation, and consummation of Christ’s kingdom.

#### Modern Application

In the first place, anytime the record of Jacob’s life leads us to consider our responsibility to be loyal to God, we should keep in mind how Christ himself fulfilled all righteousness in the inauguration of his kingdom. Hebrews 4:15 tells us that Christ was tempted just like we are, but he never sinned. In fact, Christ was so loyal to God’s
commands that he willingly died on the cross under God’s judgment in the place of all who believe in him. And his perfect righteousness is now imputed to us by faith. Christ’s own personal loyalty to God in the inauguration of his kingdom keeps us from reducing the application of Jacob’s life to moralism — “Do this; don’t do that.” Every moral implication of Jacob’s life should be viewed first in terms of Christ’s own fulfillment of all righteousness on our behalf.
In the second place, when we see the theme of loyalty in the story of Jacob, we find guidance for our own loyal service to Christ today. During the continuation of Christ’s kingdom, Jacob’s life still calls on us to consider our own loyalty to God. We’re reminded of passages like Hebrews 12:1-2 that encourage us to imitate the faithfulness of those who have gone before us, including Jacob.
And in the third place, every facet of Jacob’s story that touches on the requirement of human loyalty should turn our hearts toward loyalty to Christ at the consummation of God’s kingdom. The theme of loyalty reminds us that we who follow Christ will one day be transformed into God’s perfected, faithful servants. As passages like 1 John 3:2 teach, when Christ returns, “we will be like him.”

> We can apply the Jacob stories to our own lives today by seeing that Jacob was promised God’s blessing. It was God's word that had promised that he had set his love on Jacob and yet, Jacob spent much of his life trying to gain, by hook or crook, what God had already promised him. So, we’re often like Jacob. We strive to gain in life — through any means necessary sometimes — what God has already promised us, in fact, has already given us in Christ. No verse in the New Testament speaks to that perhaps as well as Romans 8:32: “If God did not spare his own Son, how much more will he not give us all things in him?” Through Christ we can especially hear the words of Psalm 46: “Cease striving and know that I am God (NASB),” and — if I may add — know that he is a good God, kindly disposed toward his covenant children.— Rev. Michael J. Glodo

Having looked at the major themes of God’s grace to Israel and Israel’s loyalty to God, we should turn to a third major theme in this part of Genesis: God’s blessings to Israel.

### GOD’S BLESSINGS TO ISRAEL

We’ll examine God’s blessings to Israel in the same way that we explored Moses’ other themes. We’ll think first in terms of Moses’ original meaning, and then we’ll consider our modern application of this theme. Let’s begin with Moses’ original meaning.

#### Original Meaning

In general terms, God’s covenant relationship with his people always involves blessings for obedience and curses for disobedience. There’s no doubt that Jacob experienced negative consequences from his disobedience. For instance, after deceiving his brother and father, Jacob had to flee for his life. He also experienced hard times from his father-in-law, Laban.

But Moses clearly placed much more emphasis on the blessings that God gave to Jacob to remind his original audience that God had given them many blessings as well. God’s blessings in Jacob’s life fall roughly into two groups: blessings despite Jacob’s disobedience and blessings in response to Jacob’s obedience.
On the one hand, Jacob received blessings despite his disloyalty. For instance, in Genesis 27:27-29, Jacob received God’s blessing through Isaac even though he acquired it by deceiving Isaac. Jacob also received God’s blessings at Bethel in 28:13-15 despite the fact that he was fleeing for his life from Esau.
On the other hand, in the later divisions of Jacob’s story, God’s blessings came in response to Jacob’s loyalty. For instance, in Genesis 29:1–31:55, God granted Jacob blessings of family and wealth through Laban. After Jacob humbled himself, God granted him blessings through Esau in Genesis 32:1–33:17. In a similar way, in Genesis 33:18–
34:31, Jacob received God’s blessings at Shechem after his sons engaged in conflict with the Canaanites. God also gave Jacob blessings at Bethel in 35:9-13 when the patriarch devoted himself to the worship of God.
Moses knew that the Israelites who followed him toward the Promised Land were going to face many challenges in the exodus and conquest. So, in these and many other passages, Moses focused on God’s blessings to Jacob to inspire gratitude in his original audience and to motivate them to pursue God’s blessings even further. Once we see the original meaning in the theme of God’s blessings to Israel, it isn’t difficult to grasp the significance of these matters for modern application.

#### Modern Application

In line with our earlier discussions, we’ll speak once again in terms of the inauguration, continuation and consummation of Christ’s kingdom. We should first turn our hearts toward Christ himself during the inauguration of the kingdom. In contrast with Jacob, Jesus didn’t receive any blessings in spite of disloyalty; he had no sin. But because he was faithful to the Father, Jesus received great blessings during his lifetime on earth and even greater blessings when he ascended into heaven. What is most remarkable about Jesus’ own blessings is that, as passages like Ephesians 1:3 teach, through our union with Christ, we share in the blessings Jesus obtained.
In addition to this, the New Testament teaches that Christ pours out blessings on his people throughout the continuation of his kingdom. Just as he did with Jacob, God blesses us, sometimes despite our disloyalty and at other times in response to our loyalty. Now, life is full of self-denial and suffering for Christ’s followers. But passages like 2
Corinthians 1:21-22 and Ephesians 1:13-14 make it clear that God has promised to seal each of us with the wondrous blessing of his Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit lives in and among us as the guarantee of our even greater inheritance in the world to come.
So, whenever we see God’s blessings to Jacob in the book of Genesis, we’re reminded of the immeasurable blessings we’ll receive at the consummation of Christ’s kingdom. As passages like Matthew 25:34 teach so clearly, when Christ returns, God will welcome us into “the kingdom prepared for us since the creation of the world.”
 Having looked at the major themes of God’s grace to Israel, Israel’s loyalty to God, and God’s blessings to Israel, let’s turn to the fourth, and clearly the most prominent theme in Moses’ record of Jacob’s life: God’s blessings through Israel to others.
