### GOD’S BLESSINGS THROUGH ISRAEL

As before, we’ll explore the theme of God’s blessings through Israel in terms of Moses’ original meaning and then turn to the theme’s modern application. Let’s look first at Moses’ original meaning.

#### Original meaning

To understand the significance of this theme for the original audience, we need to recall God’s special commission to Abraham as the father of the nation of Israel. The story of Abraham in Genesis explains that God commissioned the people of Israel to take the lead in fulfilling humanity’s original commission. They were to multiply and fill the earth with faithful images of God. And one way they were to do this was by spreading God’s blessings to other peoples throughout the earth. As we read in Genesis 12:2-3, God said to Abraham:

>  You will be a blessing. I will bless those who bless you, and whoever curses you I will curse; and all peoples on earth will be blessed through you (Genesis 12:2-3).

Notice here that God called for Abraham to spread the blessings of God’s kingdom to “all peoples on earth.” But notice that even though God’s blessings would spread throughout the entire earth, not every person would be blessed. God said: “I will bless those who bless you, and whoever curses you I will curse.” In other words, some would reject Israel’s efforts, and others would accept them. And God promised to bless and curse other peoples accordingly.
Interestingly enough, the same twofold process of blessing and cursing that God revealed to Abraham was repeated to Jacob in Genesis 27:29 when Isaac blessed Jacob, saying:

> May those who curse you be cursed and those who bless you be blessed (Genesis 27:29).

Moses devoted most of his record of Jacob’s life to pointing out how the patriarch interacted with various people in his day. These were the ancestors of people groups that interacted with the Israelites in Moses’ day. So, in this way, Moses taught Israel how to treat this or that group. Should they go to war? Or should they establish peace?
For instance, the stories of Jacob deal with two people groups within the borders of the Promised Land.
On the one hand, the sixth division reports encounters between Jacob and Canaanites in 33:18–35:15. In Genesis 15:16, God made it clear that he would not bring Israel out of Egypt until “the sin of the Amorites” — another term for Canaanites — had “reached its full measure.” With few exceptions, like Rahab, the Canaanites had so defiled the Promised Land by the days of Moses that God commanded Israel to destroy them. So, it’s not surprising that Moses reported Jacob’s defeat of the Shechemites and God’s protection of Jacob from other Canaanites.
On the other hand, the second division of Jacob’s life tells of encounters between Isaac and Philistines in 26:1-33. Unlike Jacob’s conflict with Canaanites, this division focuses on Isaac’s peace with Philistines. We know from Joshua 13:1-5 that Philistines lived in the lands God had promised to Israel. But their name indicates that the Philistines were a seafaring people who came from Caphtor. For this reason, they didn’t
immediately come under God’s judgment against Canaanites. This policy was supported by the examples of Abraham in Genesis 21:22-34 and Isaac in 26:26-33. Both of these patriarchs made treaties of peace with the Philistines. As a result, the Israelites in Moses’ day were to emulate Abraham and Isaac by seeking to live alongside Philistines in peace. It was only after the Philistines broke this peace in later generations that Israel waged war against them.
Beyond these examples, Jacob’s story also deals with people who lived outside of the Promised Land. For example, the central division of Jacob’s time with Laban in 29:1– 31:55 focuses on the Israelites’ distant relatives who lived in Paddan Aram, just north of the Promised Land. The record of Jacob’s time there warns against the deceit that characterized Laban and his family. But Genesis 31:51-55 indicates that Jacob and Laban swore to honor the geographical boundary between them and to live at peace with each other. This made it clear that the Israelites following Moses were to live at peace with their relatives on the northern border. It was only later that Israel was to spread the kingdom of God to this place as well.
In addition to dealing with peoples who lived in the Promised Land and on the northern border, the majority of Jacob’s life story focuses on his interactions with his brother Esau. As we’ve noted, the beginning of struggle for the brothers and nations in Genesis 25:19-34 stressed the fact that Jacob and Esau’s interactions foreshadowed Israel’s interactions with the Edomites who lived in Seir, the southernmost border of the Promised Land.
Edom was particularly important for the original audience of Genesis because they’d faced Edomite hostility as they moved along the southern border of the Promised Land. God had directed the Israelites to make war with other peoples in this region, but in Deuteronomy 2:4-6 and Numbers 20:14-21, we learn that Moses specifically directed
Israel to live humbly and at peace with their relatives, the Edomites.
The story of Jacob reminded the Israelites that Jacob had gained God’s blessing
through deceit. It also pointed out that Jacob humbled himself toward Esau. And more than this, the stories about Jacob focused on the peaceful, geographical separation of Jacob and Esau and their descendants. These dimensions of Moses’ account spoke directly to the ways the Israelites following him were to treat the Edomites. It wasn’t until much later, when the Edomites troubled Israel that Israel went to war with them.
Now that we’ve touched on the original meaning of God’s blessings through Israel to others, we should turn to the modern application of this theme.

#### Modern Application

This theme has many implications for our lives, but for the sake of convenience we’ll focus once again on the three phases of Christ’s kingdom. First, in the inauguration of his kingdom, Jesus, Israel’s King, came offering God’s blessings to all people on earth. Passages like John 12:47-48 tell us that, in his first advent, Jesus came to defeat Satan and his demonic forces. But he also came with terms of peace to every nation on earth. Jesus and his apostles and prophets met resistance, but they patiently offered reconciliation with God through the proclamation of the gospel. They also warned of God’s judgment on the last day against those who rejected the gospel.
Second, during the continuation of Christ’s kingdom, God’s blessings continue to spread to the nations through the ministry of the church. Following the example of Christ
and his apostles and prophets, we move against evil spirits who continue to deceive the nations. As passages like 2 Corinthians 5:20 put it, we are “Christ’s ambassadors.” We offer terms of peace and reconciliation with God to the entire world, even as we warn of God’s judgment on the last day.
Third, we should apply Jacob’s interactions with others with a view to the consummation of Christ’s kingdom. In Old Testament times, Israel’s offer of peace to others was often withdrawn when God determined that it was time to bring judgment. In a similar way, when Christ returns in glory, the offer of peace to the nations will be withdrawn completely from all who have resisted Christ and his kingdom. At that time, the wicked will fall under God’s judgment, but as passages like Revelation 5:9-10 tell us, countless people from every corner of the earth who have trusted Christ will enter the worldwide kingdom of God.
 
 ## CONCLUSION
 
In this lesson, we’ve explored Moses’ presentation of the patriarch Jacob’s life in the book of Genesis. We’ve seen how Moses masterfully integrated the structure and content of his record so that the life of Jacob would touch the lives of the Israelites that followed him toward the Promised Land. We’ve also noted how Moses’ major themes of God’s grace to Israel, Israel’s loyalty to God, God’s blessings to Israel and God’s blessings through Israel, not only provided practical guidance for the nation of Israel in Moses’ day, but continue to guide followers of Christ as we seek to serve God in our own day.
The story of Jacob is a wonderful story of hope for all who trust in Christ. It first helped Moses’ original audience as they dealt with their own failures and successes. And it guided their interactions with other peoples as they moved toward the Promised Land. It also does something similar for you and me today. In the life of Jacob, we are reassured that no one is beyond the reach of God’s mercy. And as those who are joined to Christ, despite our many failures, we can learn from Jacob how we are to extend the blessings of God’s kingdom throughout the world until Christ returns in glory.

Dr. Scott Redd (Host) is President and Associate Professor of Old Testament at Reformed Theological Seminary, Washington D.C. Dr. Redd received his M.Div. from Reformed Theological Seminary and his M.A. and Ph.D. from The Catholic University of America. He has taught at Catholic University of America, the Augustine Theological Institute in Malta, and the International Training Institute in the Mediterranean basin. Dr. Redd has contributed to various publications such as Tabletalk (Ligonier Ministries), The Washington Post and First Things. In addition, he published Constituent Postponement in Biblical Hebrew Verse (Society of Biblical Literature, 2014) and Wholehearted: A Biblical Look at the Greatest Commandment and Personal Wealth (Institute for Faith, Work & Economics, 2016).
Rev. Michael J. Glodo is Associate Professor of Biblical Studies at Reformed Theological Seminary in Orlando, Florida.
Dr. Craig S. Keener is the F.M. and Ada Thompson Chair of Biblical Studies at Asbury Theological Seminary.
Dr. John Oswalt is the Visiting Distinguished Professor of Old Testament at Asbury Theological Seminary.
Dr. Tom Petter is Associate Professor of Old Testament at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary.
Dr. Richard L. Pratt, Jr. is President of Third Millennium Ministries and Adjunct Professor of Old Testament at Reformed Theological Seminary, Orlando Campus.
Dr. Douglas Stuart is Professor of Old Testament at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary.
