# Building Your Theology
Lesson Four
Authority in Theology

## INTRODUCTION

Have you ever noticed how much of our lives we spend following authorities? I know it sounds strange to say this in the modern world, but it’s true. When a car breaks down, we look for someone who knows a lot about cars. When we become sick, we look for an authority in medicine. We may not agree with everything these experts say, but we don’t try to handle these and other complicated matters on our own. In nearly every area of life, if we are wise, we find the right authorities and listen carefully to what they have to say.  
Something like this should be true in Christian theology as well. All too often, well-meaning Christians think that learning and living theology is such a personal matter that we don’t need the help of authorities. After all, we have the Bible and we have a personal relationship with God. Isn’t that enough? But as we’ll see in this lesson, God has ordained a number of authorities to help us as we build our theology. 
This fourth lesson in our series Building Your Theology is entitled “Authority in Theology.” We’ll be exploring some of the central issues involved in discovering and following authority as we build our theology. 
We’ll focus our attention on the ways Christians have handled authority in theology in three different periods of church history. First, we’ll summarize the outlooks on theological authority in medieval Roman Catholicism. Second, we’ll examine the approach to theological authority in early Protestantism. And third, we’ll explore how we should deal with these matters in contemporary Protestantism. Let’s begin by looking at the medieval Roman Catholic view on authority in Christian theology. 

