## MEDIEVAL ROMAN CATHOLICISM

We said in an earlier lesson that this series is oriented toward evangelical Protestant theology. To understand how Protestant branches of the church view authority in theology, it’s important to see how these traditions stem from the Protestant Reformation. Now, the Protestant Reformation took place for many reasons, but one of the chief causes was a dispute over the views on religious authority found in medieval Roman Catholicism. These outlooks and practices formed a crucial backdrop to Protestant views on authority in theology. 
As we explore medieval Roman Catholicism, we’ll touch on two topics: first, the authority of Scripture in the medieval church; and second, the resulting outlook on the authority of the church. Let’s look first at the authority of Scripture in the medieval Roman Catholic Church.

### AUTHORITY OF SCRIPTURE 

Even prior to the Reformation, different individuals and orders within the church handled the Scriptures in different ways. But it’s fair to say that the vast majority of medieval theologians believed in the authority of Scripture, at least in theory. In practice, however, the medieval church took a posture toward the Bible that made it nearly impossible to act on this commitment to the authority of Scripture. 
As we investigate the medieval church’s problem as to the authority of Scripture, we’ll touch on three matters. First, we’ll consider the extreme view of biblical inspiration during the medieval period. Second, we’ll look at the excessive views on the meaning of Scripture. And third, we’ll examine exaggerated claims about the Bible’s obscurity. Let’s think first about the medieval outlook on the inspiration of Scripture.


#### Inspiration 

By and large, medieval Catholic theologians affirmed both that the Bible was fully inspired by God and that it came through human instruments. Unfortunately, however, during this period of church history, many theologians went to extremes in the way they understood inspiration. They emphasized Scripture’s divine origins to the neglect of Scripture’s human and historical origins. 
The medieval overemphasis on the divine origins of the Bible came about for a number of reasons. For one, medieval theologians depended heavily on Greek philosophies — such as Neo-Platonism and Aristotelianism — that guided the categories and priorities of Christian theology in many ways. These philosophies valued eternal realities much more than temporal and historical realities. So, Christian theologians learned to think that Scripture’s historical and human origins were far less essential than its heavenly origins.
Beyond this, medieval biblical scholars were so uninformed about the ancient history of Bible times that they couldn’t make much practical use of the Bible’s historical backgrounds in their theology. Instead, they stressed what they did know — namely that the Bible contained timeless truths that the eternal God of heaven had revealed — and they largely downplayed other considerations. 
Medieval theologians’ view of biblical inspiration wasn’t the only matter that discouraged employing the full authority of Scripture. The medieval church’s stress on the divine origins of the Bible also led to an unfortunate belief about the meaning of Scripture. 


#### Meaning 

It was widely assumed that, due to Scripture’s celestial origins, the Bible didn’t convey meaning in the same way that other books did. Rather, because God inspired it, Scripture overflowed with meanings. Many medieval theologians followed Augustine in believing that one proof of biblical inspiration was that texts of Scripture had manifold meanings. Listen to the way Augustine put it in Book 3, chapter 27 of On Christian Doctrine:

> When … two or more interpretations are put upon the same words of Scripture, even though the meaning the writer intended remain undiscovered, there is no danger … For what more liberal and more fruitful provision could God have made in regard to the Sacred Scriptures than that the same words might be understood in several senses? 

In many ways, we can admire Augustine’s high view of Scripture. The Bible is no ordinary book, and its extraordinary qualities point to its divine inspiration. We can also agree that many aspects of the Bible can be explained only in terms of God’s supernatural supervision of its writing. But Augustine’s outlook went much further than this. He believed that divine inspiration caused passages in the Bible to burst with multiple meanings. So, instead of concerning ourselves with what the Bible’s human authors intended to convey, Augustine believed we should focus attention on the many meanings intended by God. For our purposes, we’ll call Augustine’s view, and related views, “classical polyvalence” — the belief that biblical texts have many levels of meaning or value because they come from God.
Perhaps the most widely known expression of classical polyvalence was the interpretive approach popularized by John Cassian, known as “the Quadriga.” According to this approach, each biblical text should be viewed as having four distinct meanings. First, the literal sense was the plain or ordinary meaning of a text. Second, the allegorical sense interpreted texts as metaphors for doctrinal truth. Third, the tropological or moral sense produced ethical guidelines for Christian conduct. And fourth, the anagogical sense pointed to the future fulfillment of the divine promises in the eschaton, or in the last days.
The details of the Quadriga and other expressions of classical polyvalence are not important for our purposes — many writers have explained them elsewhere. We simply need to know that, by the time of the Reformation, most Catholic theologians believed that the meanings of biblical texts went far beyond the normal or ordinary meaning. And significantly, they tended to believe that these additional meanings were not rooted in the meaning the biblical authors intended to convey. In fact, the literal or plain sense of a passage was often considered too elementary for serious theological reflection. Instead, theologians were encouraged to value the deeper, hidden layers of meaning because they revealed the depths of God’s mind to the church. 

> So, this question of there being hidden meaning of the Scripture is a really interesting one because we have problems if we come down too hard on either side of that… One of them is it lends itself to valuing this deeper meaning over the Scripture on its face. And so, that can turn us away from what Scripture reveals directly, and lead us into, “Well, but what else does it mean?” … The deeper meaning is also very quickly a process by which we can elevate some of us within the church… We see it best in the medieval church where the clergy had become a fundamentally more important group of people. Scripture was to be kept from the commoners because the commoners could only see the superficial meaning. They didn’t have the ability, the training, the skill to be able to see the deeper meaning. And if you go back and you look at medieval theology, it had gone a long way into these deep allegorical readings, and there were multiple meanings in every text, but most people couldn’t get to the deep ones.
> 
> — Dr. Tim Sansbury

The medieval approaches to the inspiration and meaning of Scripture made it difficult to act on the authority of Scripture. And these approaches also led to an overemphasis on another characteristic of the Bible: its obscurity. The Bible came to be treated as a book that was remarkably unclear, except to those who had been given special supernatural insights.


#### Obscurity

It shouldn’t surprise us that the content of the Bible would seem unclear to the average Christian prior to the Reformation. Literacy was low. Bibles were so scarce that hardly anyone had access to one. Moreover, Latin was the primary language of Scripture and theology, and for the most part, only the highly educated understood Latin well enough to make much use of it. So, it was rare indeed that people studied the Scriptures like we do today. The Bible was considered far too unavailable and obscure for the average Christian to rely directly on it in significant ways. 
Not only were the Scriptures closed to the average Christian. They were also thought to be obscure even to those with the ability and opportunity to read the Bible. According to medieval theologians, God had placed multiple layers of meaning in the Scriptures that were hidden from plain view. 
Imagine someone showing you a closed treasure box and asking you to describe what kinds of treasures were in the box. Of course, it would be impossible to know what was in the box because the treasures would be hidden. The same was true for the Bible in the medieval church.
By the time of the Reformation, belief in the obscurity of the Bible made it nearly impossible for the Bible to have much practical or real authority over the development of theology. In theory, the Bible remained God’s inspired treasure box for Christian theology, but for all practical purposes, the Bible remained closed. It was so obscure that it was unable to guide theologians in their task. 

> In the medieval church, most believers affirmed that God’s full intent in Scripture was known through a fourfold approach: the moral following the literal, the anagogical, and the allegorical. So, the Reformers of the sixteenth century — called “Protestants” by most of us — objected to this, part in theory but especially because of what came out of that, which was a tradition of teaching that they felt was, in some cases, a corruption of Scripture, or it obscured the original intent or authorial intent of Scripture, in favor of church authority.
> 
> — Dr. James D. Smith III 

With the medieval Roman Catholic view of the authority of Scripture in mind, we’re ready to turn to our second consideration: the authority of ecclesiastical theology in the medieval church.

