## CONTEMPORARY PROTESTANTISM

“Authority” is a notion that evokes strong negative reactions among evangelical Protestants today in many parts of the world. Many of us see how authorities often abuse their power and we naturally resist them. As we’ve seen, through the millennia Christians have struggled with these matters even in theology. So, what should we learn from the ways our forebears dealt with theological authority? What are the values and dangers of authority for contemporary evangelicals as we build theology today?
We’ll answer these questions about contemporary Protestantism first by addressing the kinds of outlooks we should have toward the authority of Scripture. Second, we’ll suggest some important perspectives we should have toward the authority of the church. Let’s turn first to the authority of Scripture. 


### AUTHORITY OF SCRIPTURE

> The Bible’s authority over the Christian is an absolute authority in every part of their life. To do otherwise is really to set ourselves up as God. To look at the Bible and say, “Well, I’m not going to follow that part but I’m going to follow this part,” or, “I’m going to obey this little verse and not this little verse,” is, in one sense, to set ourselves over Scripture and to determine what is true and what is not, what we follow and what we won’t, and when we do that, we’ve become little gods ourselves. We’ve set ourselves up as the god of the universe. And that is idolatry. So, to deny Scripture and not live by its authority in one sense is to try to supplant God and make ourselves that authority. So, it’s very important that Scripture dominate the Christian’s life in almost every area, or in every area, so that they really do give God his proper place as the ultimate authority.  
> 
> — Dr. Michael J. Kruger

We’ll explore contemporary views of the authority of Scripture by touching on three issues that have concerned us throughout this lesson: the inspiration of Scripture, the meaning of Scripture, and the clarity of Scripture. In our day, a number of different viewpoints on these subjects claim to follow the Reformation tradition. We’ll look into these views and assess their value, beginning with modern perspectives on the inspiration of Scripture.


#### Inspiration

At least three views of inspiration are popular among contemporary Protestants. On one end of the spectrum is a view we often call romantic inspiration. On the other end of the spectrum is a similarly extreme view called mechanical inspiration. And between these extreme views is an outlook that has been called organic inspiration. Let’s look briefly at all three of these views. 
Romantic inspiration is widely endorsed by more liberal-leaning Protestants. In this view, the Bible is inspired in a “romantic” sense, much like great writers, artists, and composers — like Shakespeare, Rembrandt, or Bach — were “inspired.” So, God motivated biblical writers, but he didn’t superintend their writings. In this view, the Scriptures are just the opinions of men. The Scriptures are, therefore, fallible and lack absolute authority over the church. Now, needless to say, this outlook on inspiration must be rejected by those who adhere to the spirit of the Reformation. This view abandons the central Protestant commitment to sola Scriptura by denying both the reliability and the ultimate authority of the Bible.
On the other end of the spectrum is mechanical inspiration, or as it’s sometimes called “inspiration by dictation.” To one degree or another, this outlook asserts that biblical authors were relatively passive as they wrote the Scriptures. In this view, God essentially authored the Bible himself, while human writers acted as his compliant secretaries. On the whole, this view leads away from the Reformation principle of sola Scriptura by denying the importance of the human author’s historical context and the original meaning. As the Reformers were careful to note, denying the value of the literal sense of Scripture hinders the practical authority of Scripture. The meaning of the Bible can no longer be assessed and followed, and we’re forced to read our own ideas into the Bible. As a result, the Bible itself no longer serves as our supreme authority in theology.
Contemporary Protestant theology must avoid the extremes of both romantic and mechanical inspiration by re-affirming the fully organic nature of inspiration. In organic inspiration, God moved biblical authors to write and superintended their writings so that they wrote infallibly and authoritatively. But he didn’t circumvent their personal thoughts, their motivations, their feelings or their theology. On the contrary, the human and divine dimensions of inspiration were not at odds at all. Rather, all of the Bible presents God’s timeless truths, but in highly-human, culturally-conditioned texts. All of the Bible’s teachings are normative for all times, but its teachings are tied to the context of particular circumstances. The Protestant view of organic inspiration emphasizes both the human and the divine, the historical and the transcendent qualities of the whole Bible. In this view of inspiration, the doctrine of sola Scriptura is maintained. Without a doubt, of the three major ways Protestants think of biblical inspiration, the doctrine of organic inspiration most fully accords with the principles that gave rise to and led the Protestant Reformation.

> One of the things I love about the Bible is the variety of the authors and how the Holy Spirit worked through each of those individual authors with their uniqueness of who they were, their experiences, their lives, in order to bring us a full picture of who God is and what that means for us. So, when we see how God used different authors, it seems that what the Holy Spirit does is internally works with them to give them the sense of what to write, of what to say, but through their own personality and through their own experiences. So, it’s alive, it’s rich, it’s full. It allows lots of people to connect with it in different ways, as opposed to something being very mechanical. God, I think, appreciates the experiences we go through, and the Holy Spirit then indwells those authors in a way that gives them an inspiration of what to write and then works through who they are in their personalities.
> 
> — Dr. Dan Lacich

In addition to stressing the organic nature of inspiration, modern Protestant theologians must also evaluate the authority of Scripture by rightly assessing the meaning of Scripture. 
