### AUTHORITY OF THE CHURCH

We’ll focus again in two directions: first, we’ll look at how contemporary Protestant theologians should view past ecclesiastical authorities; and second, we’ll address how they should view contemporary Protestant authorities. Let’s look first at the authority of the church in the past. 


#### Past Authorities

As we’ve seen, early Protestants understood that the Holy Spirit had taught the church many truths before their time. As a result, they sought to maintain proper respect for the teachings of the early church fathers, the creeds, and longstanding traditions of the church. In effect, early Protestants accepted the teachings of the church as provisional judgments. Yet, they also balanced this practice with a strong affirmation of the supremacy of Scripture over the teachings of the church. They relied on and built on the past, but they also subjected all teachings of the church to the unquestionable standard of Scripture. 
Unfortunately, theologians today sometimes find it difficult to hold firmly to both sides of this early Protestant position. Some lean heavily toward traditionalism. Others move toward biblicism. But many in the Protestant tradition practice semper reformanda, between these extremes. 
On one side, some contemporary theologians fall into the trap of “traditionalism.” By traditionalism, we mean they stray toward practices that closely resemble medieval Roman Catholic traditionalism. Now, Protestant theologians affirm the authority of Scripture, and they certainly reject the traditions of Catholicism. But many times, traditionalists so highly treasure past expressions of their faith that, on a practical level, they fail to scrutinize the past adequately. 

> It’s sort of ironic because we Protestants protest the idea of a magisterium or a church tradition that is on par with Scripture. And yet, in practice we do that as well sometimes. You probably know people who will emphasize a particular confession of the church — the Belgic, or the Heidelberg, or for many of us, the Westminster Confession of Faith. It’s really kind of got the same kind of authority as the Bible for many of us. And yet, right in the very first chapter of the Westminster Confession of Faith, it says that Scripture is the final authority on all church councils, on all church theological disputes… Tradition is a good guide, but it’s a terrible master. We each have a role to play in God’s mission, and we’re to embody the story of Scripture in a unique way, benefitting from the example of others, the example of tradition, but not being mastered by it.
> 
> — Dr. Gregory R. Perry

On the other side, some modern theologians go to the opposite extreme as they deal with ecclesiastical authority from the past. In a Christian version of Enlightenment modernism, they fall into what may be called “biblicism.” These theologians act as if each person must come to the Bible and decide every theological issue without the aid of past Protestant tradition. 

> For the Reformers and for Christians throughout the ages, they have understood the Scriptures to be the source and witness to divine revelation. But this has never meant for Christians that we don’t need traditions, nor that we aren’t standing in a particular tradition ourselves. So, this idea that sola Scriptura would mean a rejection of all creeds except for one’s own reading the Bible, is simply not what the Reformers meant, nor is a wise way forward.
> 
> — Dr. Jonathan T. Pennington

Time and again, Protestant theologians have reacted to traditionalism by saying things like, “It doesn’t matter what the church has said. All I care about is what the Bible says.” This kind of rhetoric goes far beyond submitting to the Scriptures as our final authority. It neglects the wisdom that God’s Spirit has granted to the church. Instead, it grants theological judgment only to the individual or groups of individuals who are currently at work.
To continue in the spirit of the Reformation today, we must re-affirm the principle of semper reformanda. We must strive to affirm the supremacy of Scripture without ignoring the importance of Reformation tradition. 
Semper reformanda today requires that we accept as provisional judgments not only the early church fathers and councils, but also our own confessions and traditions. But these authorities from the past should always be subject to the unquestionable teaching of Scripture. To further the Reformation today, we need to learn how to give this kind of weight to ecclesiastical authorities from the past under the authority of Scripture.

> The idea of semper reformanda really is communicating that the church reformed is always reforming. And the reason why that matters is it’s a way of communicating, the church always stands under the authority of Scripture. So, any time we discover that in our practices we’re living outside of what we think the biblical witness calls us to, we must be willing to reform… And so, the church’s always being willing to reform is an important idea to say, we stand under Scripture; we need to be willing to test even our interpretations of Scripture. But we can’t just go by whatever is trendy at any given time. And that is partly why, in order for the church to always be reforming, it means we have to be in conversation with the past. We have to figure out what people from different ages thought — how has God’s Spirit worked in the past so that whatever we’re saying today still falls within what God has always been teaching and how he’s been leading his church through the ages? — so that we are willing to reform under the Scriptures, reform our lives, reform our thoughts, without ever starting a new religion, because we are the religion of God the Father, the Son and the Spirit — nothing new.
> 
> — Dr. Kelly M. Kapic

Having looked at the authority of the church and the way Protestant theologians today should relate to past authorities, we should turn to an equally important matter. How should today’s theologians assess contemporary Protestant authorities? How should we understand the authority of theological formulations that are developing in our day? 


#### Contemporary Authorities

Early Protestants affirmed the value of theology developed by duly ordained leaders in their day. But they also guarded against exalting contemporary authorities in the church over the teaching of Scripture. Unfortunately, once again, contemporary Protestant theologians often find it difficult to follow these early outlooks. They tend to go to extremes in the ways that they understand Protestant theologians living in their own day. 
On the one side, some theologians tend to be skeptical about doctrinal formulations today. On the other side, many tend to be dogmatic about doctrinal formulations in our times. But the way of authentic Reformation theology is to strive for faithful doctrinal formulations. Theologians who are severely skeptical about contemporary doctrinal formulations reject all sense of authority or need of submission to what the church says today. On the other end of the spectrum, theologians who are extremely dogmatic insist that contemporary formulations are perfect.

> We have to be very careful about the ways we evaluate contemporary Christian beliefs. On the one side, there’s a skepticism that often grows among evangelical Christians where we think that if it’s something that’s new … that it must be wrong because the truth is in the past. And unfortunately, this reveals the fact that they do not believe that Holy Spirit is still active and alive in the church today in ways he has been in the past… On the other side, you get people who go the other extreme and say things like, “Well, if it’s old fashioned, if it comes from the past, it’s irrelevant for today. What we need is some new ideas.” And we mustn’t go down that track either because Holy Spirit is not just working in the church today; he’s been working in the church for millennia. And so, as we realize that there is truth in the past, we must build on that truth from the past. The interpretations of the church through the millennia should be very impactful on the ways we think and live in our day today. Theology, you see, is dependence on the Holy Spirit, helping us to learn the Scriptures and to apply them with the wisdom that he’s given the church in the past but with relevance for the issues that we face today. 
> 
> — Dr. Richard L. Pratt, Jr. 

The severe skepticism and dogmatism that we face in our day exists in part because doctrinal statements are often thought to be simply true or false. In reality, it’s much more helpful to create faithful doctrinal formulations by considering a range of possibilities between true and false. All theological statements are more or less true or false depending on how closely they mirror the infallible teaching of Scripture.
On the one side, in contrast to the skeptical view, we find that some theological positions describe the teaching of the Bible well enough that we may call them true and consider them valuable. Now, these statements are not perfect, of course. But they’re close enough to be accepted as true, unless some qualification arises that reveals otherwise. 
On the other side, some theological positions are so far from the teaching of Scripture that we’re right to label them as false. Unlike those who cling dogmatically to the authority of contemporary formulations, we can reject these formulations unless some qualification later shows that they’re acceptable.
Consider, for instance, a contemporary doctrinal formulation that states, “God is sovereign over all things.” We normally should have no problem with saying that this is true. The Bible does teach that God is sovereign over all his creation. Yet, because this statement can be improved upon, it is, in some sense, imperfect. If, perhaps, we’re distinguishing biblical faith from Deism, this statement could actually give a false impression. Deism teaches that God, in his sovereignty, doesn’t interact with historical events after his initial act of creation. So, the statement “God is sovereign over all things” could actually lead us away from the reality of divine providence — that God is intimately involved with his creation. 
In the end, in regard to contemporary theological formulations, some theological statements are close enough to Scripture to be counted as true; others are far enough from Scripture to be counted as false. In either case, being dogmatic and assuming that all contemporary formulations are true, will not benefit us. But being skeptical and ignoring the value of contemporary ecclesiastical authority is also not helpful. All theological formulations can be improved, but we shouldn’t disregard them simply because they’ve been formulated in our day. This is nothing more than the early Reformed maxim, semper reformanda — “always reforming.” 
This is what we mean when we say that the aim of contemporary Protestant theology is to produce faithful theological formulations. We humbly and responsibly use all the resources God has given us — exegesis of Scripture, interaction in community, and Christian living — to develop faithful doctrinal formulations. We seek to conform our teachings, as much as possible, to the teachings of Scripture. The closer our doctrines are to Scripture, the more authority they have. The further they are from Scripture, the less authority they have. But in all cases, the theology of the church must always be held in submission to the Scriptures. 
