## CONCLUSION

In this lesson we’ve explored the relationship between biblical and ecclesiastical authority in theology. We’ve looked at a number of outlooks that developed during the period of medieval Roman Catholicism. We’ve also seen how the movement of early Protestantism corrected these views. And finally, we’ve explored the need to apply the outlooks of the Reformation to biblical and ecclesiastical authority in contemporary Protestantism. 
Building a Christian theology requires us all to wrestle with authority, both the authority of Scripture and the authority of the church. As we’ve seen in this lesson, we’re led astray from the truth unless we reaffirm in the strongest terms the absolute, unquestionable authority of Scripture. This is our safeguard, our sure anchor in theology. At the same time, we must never neglect what God has done in his church. Those who have gone before us were not perfect. The teachers of the church today are not perfect. Yet, as fallible as they may be, God has established authorities in the church that we are to honor. If we keep these principles in mind, we’ll be able to avoid many problems that have plagued Christian theology in the past and in our own day. We’ll be able to build theology that will serve the body of Christ and bring honor to God. 
 

-------


Vincent Bacote, Ph.D. (Host) is Associate Professor of Theology and Director of the Center for Applied Christian Ethics at Wheaton College. Dr. Bacote holds an M.Div. from Trinity Evangelical Divinity School with an emphasis on Urban Ministry, and an M.Phil. and Ph.D. in Theological and Religious Studies from Drew University. He is a member of the American Academy of Religion, the Christian Theological Research Fellowship and the Evangelical Theological Society. A prolific writer and speaker, Dr. Bacote has authored and edited numerous books, including The Spirit in Public Theology: Appropriating the Legacy of Abraham Kuyper (Baker Academic, 2005) and The Political Disciple: A Theology of Public Life (Zondervan, 2015). He is also a regular columnist for Comment and has contributed to magazines such as Books and Culture, Christianity Today, and Think Christian. He and his family reside in the Chicago area.


Dr. Biao Chen is Director of Chinese Projects at Thirdmill.

Dr. Steve Curtis is Director of Timothy Two Project International.

Dr. Jeff Dryden is Professor of Biblical Studies at Covenant College.

Rev. Michael J. Glodo is Associate Professor of Biblical Studies at Reformed Theological Seminary in Orlando, Florida.

Dr. J. Scott Horrell is Professor of Theological Studies at Dallas Theological Seminary.

Dr. Kelly M. Kapic is Professor of Theological Studies at Covenant College.

Dr. Michael J. Kruger is President and Professor of New Testament at Reformed Theological Seminary in Charlotte, N.C.

Dr. Dan Lacich is a pastor at Northland, A Church Distributed in Orlando, FL.

Dr. Jonathan T. Pennington is Associate Professor of New Testament Interpretation and the Director of Research Doctoral Studies at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.

Nicholas Perrin, Ph.D. is the Franklin S. Dyrness Professor of Biblical Studies at Wheaton College & Graduate School.

Dr. Gregory R. Perry is Vice President for Strategic Projects at Thirdmill and former Associate Professor of New Testament and the Director of City Ministry Initiative at Covenant Theological Seminary.

Dr. Richard L. Pratt, Jr. is Co-Founder and President of Thirdmill.

Dr. Tim Sansbury is Assistant Professor of Philosophy and Theology and Vice President of Administration at Knox Theological Seminary.

Rev. George Shamblin serves at Birmingham Theological Seminary and The Center for Executive Leadership.

Dr. James D. Smith III is Associate Professor of Church History at Bethel Seminary, San Diego, and Adjunct Professor of Religion at the University of San Diego.

Dr. Carey Vinzant is Assistant Professor of Systematic Theology at Wesley Biblical Seminary.
