# Study Guide 
# Old Testament Foundations
# Module Seven – Life of Abraham – Modern Application

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for this course’s final exam.

**********************************

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 – 28:34
    
Introduction 
    
I. Abraham and Jesus
    
      A. Seed of Abraham 
    
1. Singularity 
    
2. Christ as Seed 
    
      B. Major Themes 
    
1. Divine Grace 
    
2. Abraham’s Loyalty 
    
3. Blessings to Abraham 
    
4. Blessings through Abraham 
    
    
## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. According to Dr. Pratt, what error do people often make in the way they apply the stories of Abraham to our lives today?

2. Explain how Dr. Pratt interprets Galatians 3:16. Focus especially on the way he deals with the word "seed" and with Genesis 22:16-18.

3. According to Dr. Pratt, what must any proper modern application of Abraham's life include?

4. How are the themes from the life of Abraham completed in Christ? Explain this for each of the four themes.

    
 
## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 28:34 – 56:59

II. Israel and the Church 

      A. Seed of Abraham 

1. Numerical breadth 
 
2. Ethnic identity 

3. Spiritual character

4. Historical situation

      B. Major Themes 

1. Divine Grace 

2. Abraham’s Loyalty 

3. Blessings to Abraham 

4. Blessings through Abraham 

Conclusion 


