# Old Testament Foundations – Module Seven
# Father Abraham: Modern Application
## Discussion Questions 

1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	How can we say that Christ is the singular seed of Abraham? 


3.	In what four ways are Israel and the church alike as the seed of Abraham?


4.	Why is it important for believers that Christ fulfills the major themes in Abraham’s life?


5.	What are some practical modern implications of the ethnic diversity of Abraham’s seed in Moses’ day?


6.	Why is it important to recognize that the church contains both believers and unbelievers? How does this affect the way you should view and minister in the church?


7.	What basic church doctrines might be influenced by our understanding of the spiritual diversity of the church?


8.	Why does God expect loyalty from you? How can you exhibit loyalty to God in your life?


9.	In what ways do you enjoy the foretastes of blessings that God has given to you as his child?


10.	How can we teach, proclaim and exhibit the gospel in ways that bless others? What types of things might prevent Christians from proclaiming the gospel with this result?


11.	When you read and study the Bible, do you simply jump to make applications directly to your own life, or do you try to make “connections” between the original world described, the world of the first readers, and your own world? How can you do this better?
REVIEW STATEMENT on MODERN APPLICATION – MAJOR THEMES: As followers of Christ, every time we see God showing kindness in the stories of Abraham, our hearts and minds should turn to the mercy God revealed in Christ's inauguration of the kingdom, continuation of the kingdom and in the promises of his consummation of the kingdom.

CASE STUDY: Aaron preached a sermon on Abraham's defeat of the kings who were threatening Lot. The main point of his sermon was this: if you want to be blessed by God the way Abraham was, you must be as obedient as Abraham.
## Reflection Questions 
1.	Evaluate the sermon preached by Aaron as expressed in the previous case study. 
2.	In what ways was the grace of God toward Abraham a mere shadow of the grace of God revealed in Christ? 
a.	Imagine yourself living in the time of Abraham as someone in his family. What grace from God would you experience? 
b.	Now compare and contrast that with the grace you have received in Christ.
## Action Assignments
When you preach about the grace of God to and through Abraham, you can help your audience feel what his grace would have meant to Abraham and to the Israelites who later heard it from Moses. Then you can use a “how much more” argument to help them understand and feel that in Christ we have received much more grace.
