# Biblical Foundations - Module Six - The Kingdom of God in the New Testament
# Discussion Questions 


1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	How are the implications of the good news of God’s kingdom affecting the way you live in your present circumstances?


3.	God has unwavering sovereignty over all of creation. How do we respond to this truth in the midst of hard circumstances, such as natural disasters, sickness, poverty, persecution, war, and injustice?


4.	How have your personal failures deepened your appreciation of Christ’s work? 


5.	As we await God’s final victory and the defeat of his enemies, how do you remain hopeful and faithful to God?


6.	How can you encourage others to remain hopeful for the final victory over God’s enemies that will come when Jesus returns?


7.	List some obstacles, struggles, and/or strongholds that God has delivered you from. Has this deliverance changed the way you minister to others? Explain your answer.


8.	How can the biblical outlook of “the already but not yet,” help you live a faithful Christian life in this fallen world?


9.	Does the distinction between spiritual enemies and human enemies help you plant the ministry of the church and your own ministry? How?


10.	As we look forward to the final deliverance from the enemies of God, how does your anticipation of this day motivate you to persevere?
 
REVIEW STATEMENT: “Many Evangelicals today think of the good news, or gospel, as an explanation of the steps an individual must take to find salvation in Christ. But this wasn’t the idea that Jesus had in mind. As much as we should be ready to share how to become followers of Christ, the good news in the Scriptures is about something much more significant. Rather than referring to the salvation of any individual or group of people, the gospel is the good news of victory for the kingdom of God” (p. 2 of the Manuscript).
CASE STUDY: Many years ago there was a good king who reigned over a kingdom where even the poor were taken care of. The citizens of this good kingdom were happy. There was also an evil king who reigned over a kingdom where people were oppressed and taken advantage of. He was trying to overcome the good kingdom so he could be king over all. One day the good king and his army defeated the forces of evil. There were still bands of men from the evil army trying to win their kingdom back, but it was clear they had no hope. The good king extended terms of surrender to anyone who wanted to join his good kingdom. Everyone else would be banished. Some accepted his terms and joined the good kingdom.

## REFLECTION QUESTIONS:
1.	Discuss the difference between the victory over the evil kingdom with the entrance of people from the evil kingdom into the good kingdom. The gospel has implications for individual people, but also for the whole world.
2.	Reflect with your learning community on this. Part of the gospel is that one day the earth will be renewed. Satan will not be able to control the earth. Yes, it will be destroyed with fire, but out of it will come the new earth mentioned in Isaiah 65 and Revelation 21.
3.	Another part of the gospel is that God’s people will have new bodies with greater glory and apparently greater capabilities that go beyond what bodies can do now (2 Corinthians 15). 
4.	What do people in your culture think about the meaning of “the gospel”?
5.	What do the people in your church think about the meaning of “the gospel”?
6.	What have you thought about the meaning of “the gospel”?
7.	Has this lesson modified your understanding of “the gospel”? Explain and discuss with your learning community.
Action Assignments
•	Talk about the gospel to believers and include the exciting and wide sweep of what is included. Note their reaction.
•	Do the same with an unbeliever. Note the reaction. Revise your presentation to make it more effective.
