# Study Guide 
# Old Testament Foundations
# Module Nine – Joseph and His Brothers

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for this course’s final exam.

**********************************

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 – 34:11

Introduction

I. Structure and Content

     A. Patriarchal Disharmony	

  	1. Joseph Agitated Brothers

  	2. Brothers Sold Joseph

     B. Joseph's Threatening Rule

  	1. Judah's Sin in Canaan	

  	2. Joseph's Success in Egypt

      C. Reconciliation and Reunion

  	1. First Journey	

  	2. Second Journey	

  	3. Third Journey	

      D. Joseph's Benevolent Rule

      E. Patriarchal Harmony	

  	1. Jacob's Familial Arrangements		

  	2. Joseph's Familial Arrangements		


## REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. According to the lesson, what was Moses’ main purpose in writing the story of Joseph and his brothers?

2. Why did Joseph's brothers hate him?

3. How did Joseph end up in Egypt. What did Reuben try to do? What did Judah suggest?

4. According to Genesis 38, what sin did Judah commit in Canaan?

5. Why was Joseph sent to prison in Egypt?

6. How did Joseph rise to power in Egypt?

7. Describe the events of the first journey of Joseph's family to Egypt.

8. Describe the events of the second journey of Joseph's family to Egypt.

9. Describe the events of the third journey of Joseph's family to Egypt.

10. Describe the situation of the Israelites after they first settled in Egypt (Genesis 47:27).

11. What were the names of Joseph's two children? Which was given prominence when Jacob blessed them?

12. According to Genesis 50:19-21, how did Joseph finally respond to the evil manner in which his brothers had treated him? 

13. What did Joseph ask his brothers to do with his bones when he would die?

