## LITERARY CHARACTER

> Usually, when we read literature, we have some idea of what sort of literature we’re reading, and that’s what guides us as to how to read it and what we expect. So that, for example, if you read an historical novel, you’re not expecting it to be factual history, and you’re not mislead. Or if you were to read a volume of short stories and you know it’s not a continuous novel, you don’t read it in that way. So, we really need to have some idea of what sort of literature we’re reading and what kind of conventions of that literature are operating.
> 
> —	 Dr. Richard Bauckham

We will explore the literary character of the Gospels from two perspectives. First, we will consider the genre of the Gospels — their overarching literary characteristics — and second, we will discuss their historical reliability. Let’s first turn to the genre of the four gospels.


### GENRE

	In general terms, a genre is a category or type of literature. Genres are typically distinguished from each other on the basis of their literary form and function, such as their style of narration, and their use of figurative language. 
	The Bible contains many different genres. For example, there is historical narrative, such as the stories about David in the Old Testament. Another genre is poetry, such as the Psalms. Letters or epistles are another genre, and so is prophecy, and so on. Each genre of literature has its own conventions, its own ways of communicating. This is why it is so important for us to understand the genre of the Gospels. It is easier to understand what they teach, if we first understand how they teach.
To understand how the Gospels communicate, we’ll identify and describe their genre in three steps. First, we’ll make some general statements identifying the Gospels as historical narrative. Second, we’ll compare them to a specific type of historical narrative, namely Greco-Roman biography. And third, we’ll compare the Gospels to biblical historical narrative, such as the histories in the Old Testament. Let’s begin with the general category of historical narrative.


#### Historical Narrative

	Historical narratives are stories about people who lived in the past and about the actions and events that took place in their day. At a basic level, the Gospels are historical narratives because they record the life and ministry of Jesus Christ. 

> The bulk of the Bible and the Gospels themselves are intentionally written in narrative form because we are story people. We are engaged naturally, not only mentally but even in our emotions and even physical sensations, when we are engaged in a great story. And stories also enable us to live vicariously through the experiences of others. This is a large part of the power of story. And so the Gospels coming to us in the form of literature, in the form of narrative, enable us to not only learn truths about Jesus, but to experience him first hand, to see the kingdom of God and the kingdom of heaven coming in action, to see Jesus’ compassion, not just as a statement — Jesus loves humble people — but to see him tell stories and really live out stories where the humble are lifted up and the proud are brought low. And the stories and the form of literature that the Gospels are enable us also to follow the example of Jesus even as his disciples did. Giving us the stories in narrative form enables us to also follow Jesus in that way. To identify ourselves with those characters in their failures, and in their successes, and to seek to live faithful in our own story, which is our lives. 
> 
> —	Dr. Jonathan T. Pennington
 
In the secular writings of the ancient world, historical narratives typically developed in three main parts. The beginning of the narrative introduces characters and establishes a goal for the characters to achieve. The middle often presents challenges or obstacles to the characters’ success in accomplishing their goals. The end is the conclusion of the account of events. It usually shows how the characters either did or did not accomplish their goals. 
The Gospels follow this same basic outline. Each begins by introducing Jesus as the main character in the story and describes his goal of bringing salvation through God’s kingdom. Each continues by presenting challenges to Jesus’ authority and work. And each concludes by describing the outcome of Jesus’ earthly ministry. Because of these similarities, almost everyone agrees that historical narrative is the overarching genre of the Gospels.
