#### Greco-Roman Biography

Within the larger category of historical narrative, some interpreters have suggested that the Gospels belong to a smaller group of narratives known as Greco-Roman biography. 
We will consider these comparisons between the Gospels and Greco-Roman biography in two steps. First, we’ll look at the similarities between them. And second, we’ll look at some of their differences. Let’s begin with their similarities.

Similarities. Ancient biographies recounted the lives of great leaders. Although they included many different characters and stories, Greco-Roman biographies described these characters and stories in ways that highlighted the featured leader. They defended the leader’s ideas, and perpetuated awareness of his actions from one generation to another. And the Gospels were similar to ancient biographies in these ways.
	We also see parallels to some ancient biographies in the fact that Matthew and Luke include birth narratives, and all four gospels detail Jesus’ death. The Gospels also follow the conventions of ancient biography as they trace the events of Jesus’ life. Like other ancient biographers, the gospel writers arranged the events between Jesus’ birth and death in various ways. Sometimes they arranged things chronologically. Sometimes they grouped things according to topic. And sometimes they even arranged them around geography.

> I think it’s important to realize at first, initially, that — to recognize that — the Gospels are generally chronological. For example, they begin with the baptisms by John the Baptist, and then you see Jesus being baptized, then you have Jesus’s ministry, followed by his arrest, his trial, his crucifixion and resurrection. And so, in an overall sense, there is chronological order. At the same time, there are places, if you compare two gospels, there’ll be sometimes events, or wording might be given, in a different order. I think that only causes a problem if we read the Gospels as intending or claiming to give precise, chronological order in every single respect. But most authors and most kinds of narrative actually allow for an author to organize his material by order that’s other than chronological. For example, often we’ll see logical order, or we’ll see a topical grouping of subjects. Early Christians, for example Eusebius, an early fourth century Christian historian and bishop, he notes that the differences in the Gospels’ order was already widely known, and early readers didn’t have a problem with this because they didn’t assume that the strict chronological intention was intended. 
> 
> — Dr. David A. Redelings

	Another important characteristic of Greco-Roman biographies is that they related past events as historical realities so that the past was distinct from the present. Biographies focused on recording the unique, unrepeatable lives and contributions of specific, historical individuals. 
In general, ancient biographers tried to research and preserve accurate oral and written records. Consider the example provided by the respected biographer Plutarch, who lived from about A.D. 46 to 120. Plutarch was a secular Greek historian who wrote around A.D. 70, about the same time that the Gospels were written. He began his work Life of Cicero with background on Cicero’s parents, but acknowledged the limitations of data regarding Cicero’s father. 

**It is generally said, that Helvia, the mother of Cicero, was both well-born and lived a fair life; but of his father nothing is reported but in extremes. For whilst some would have him the son of a fuller, and educated in that trade, others carry back the origin of his family to Tullus Attius, an illustrious king of the Volscians, who waged war not without honour against the Romans.** 

Plutarch’s caution in separating fact from speculation regarding Cicero’s parents indicates that at least some ancient biographers paid attention to historical detail, and were interested in accuracy. The Gospels give evidence of being every bit as careful as Plutarch in their reporting.
	Broadly speaking, it is fair to say that the Gospels are historical narratives written during a time when biographical literature was popular in the Greco-Roman world. This widespread openness to biographies probably encouraged the Gospel writers in their task, and inclined them to adopt some of the formal conventions of those biographies. 
But despite the similarities between the Gospels and Greco-Roman biographies, there are also significant differences.

Differences. Although there are several differences we might mention, we’ll focus on just three. First, the Gospels differ from Greco-Roman biographies in their intended audiences. 
Ancient biographies were usually intended for broad audiences, while the Gospels were written for the relatively specific audience of the early Christian church. Although they exhibit certain traits of biographies, they are fundamentally intended for religious uses within the church. This specific design is confirmed by how quickly they became regularly used in the teaching and worship of the church. 
Second, the Gospels differ from biographies in their emphases. Greco-Roman biographies typically emphasize the personal qualities of their main characters, encouraging others to imitate their life and personalities. Although there are many ways the life of Jesus is our example, the Gospels have a distinctly different focus. They emphasize the uniqueness of Jesus. They focus on him as the one who reveals God and redeems his people as no one else can. This is why so much of the narrative of the Gospels is spent on the last week of his life — the Passion week.
	Third, the Gospels and ancient biographies represent different cultures. Biographies gave expression to Greco-Roman interests, values, and life-style. The Gospels are much more influenced by Jewish culture and especially by the Old Testament. This is true even of the Gospel of Luke, the gospel most influenced by Greek culture and thought. 
	In conclusion, there are notable similarities between the Gospels and Greco-Roman biographies. And these similarities can shed some light on the meaning of the Gospels. But in light of the significant differences between them, it’s clear that the Gospels do not fit neatly into the genre of Greco-Roman biography. 
Now that we’ve considered the gospel accounts in terms of general historical narrative and Greco-Roman biography, we’re ready to compare them to the genre of biblical historical narrative.


#### Biblical Historical Narrative

As similar as the Gospels are to typical historical narratives and even to Greco-Roman biographies, they are most similar to the historical narratives in the Old Testament. And this should not surprise us. After all, the Old Testament narratives were a part of the Gospel writers’ sacred Scriptures. From the many references each gospel writer made to the Old Testament, we can be confident that they knew the Old Testament well — probably far better than most Christians today. And their familiarity with the Old Testament influenced how they approached their task. 
Moreover, the Gospel writers and the authors of the Old Testament historical narratives wrote for a similar purpose, namely, to explain and defend God’s covenant with his people. For instance, historical narratives such as Exodus 1-19 provide the historical basis for the Mosaic Covenant in Exodus 20-24. 
	This purpose is clear in passages such as Exodus 24:8, where we read this narrative account: 

> Moses then took the blood, sprinkled it on the people and said, “This is the blood of the covenant that the Lord has made with you” (Exodus 24:8).

Other biblical narratives, such as Joshua 1–23, provide the basis for the covenant renewal in Joshua 24. And the narratives of the books of Judges and 1 Samuel are the historical basis of the Davidic Covenant in 2 Samuel 7. And in a similar way, the Gospels provide the historical foundation for the New Covenant that Jesus established. 
	Listen to the way Luke’s narrative in Luke 22:20 echoes the account in Exodus 24:8 that we just read: 

> After the supper [Jesus] took the cup, saying, “This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for you” (Luke 22:20).

	In summary, when we compare the Gospels to other known genres of literature, they are most similar to biblical historical narratives. But this doesn’t mean that they are precisely like other biblical historical narratives in every way. After all, they do borrow some features from Greco-Roman biographies. In this sense, we might say that the Gospels are a new type of biblical historical narrative. So, as we read them, it will help to think of the Gospels primarily as biblical historical narratives. But we should also see their biographic emphasis on Jesus, and interpret their other characters in relation to him. 
Having explored the genre of the Gospels, we are ready to turn to the question of the reliability of the Gospels as historical accounts about Jesus.
