#### Training

A fourth reason to trust the gospel accounts is that the training Jesus’ disciples received should have taught them how to preserve an accurate record of his words and deeds. 
	Within Jewish culture, discipleship was a well-established way of life. In fact, the Hebrew word for disciple is talmid, which means student or learner. Specifically, a disciple was the student of a particular sage or rabbi. Moreover, in the Jewish culture of Jesus’ day, one of the key exercises in learning from a rabbi was memorization. And one of the responsibilities of his disciples was to learn the words and wisdom of their teacher. 
Listen to Jesus’ words to his disciples in Luke 6:40:

> A student is not above his teacher, but everyone who is fully trained will be like his teacher (Luke 6:40).

Jesus meant that all who follow him were to study, learn, and shape their lives according to his teachings and actions. 
	The twelve disciples closest to Jesus had a great responsibility to learn Jesus’ teachings, while many others who learned from Jesus likely committed much of his teaching to memory as well. 


#### Theological Convictions

Fifth, we must never underestimate the fact that the gospel writers had strong theological convictions that emphasized the need for a true, reliable record. For example, in John 20:31, the apostle wrote these words: 

> These are written that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that by believing you may have life in his name (John 20:31).

In this passage, John stated plainly that people could receive God’s gift of life only if they knew and embraced the truth about Jesus. 
In a similar way, Matthew recorded these words of Jesus in 28:19-20 of his gospel: 

> Go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, and teaching them to obey everything I have commanded you (Matthew 28:19-20).

Here, Matthew stated that Jesus’ disciples had the responsibility of teaching everything Jesus had commanded them. As genuine followers of Jesus, they could not ignore the need to give true accounts of what he had done and said.
	The gospel writers did not record the events of Jesus’ life simply for their historical value. On the contrary, they knew that faith in Jesus was more than simply knowing the historical facts about him. But they also knew that true faith could not be based on a false or fallible historical record. They expressed Jesus’ words and deeds clearly and accurately because they wanted their readers to believe in the real Jesus, the Jesus of history. 


#### Holy Spirit

	Sixth, like all biblical writers, the gospel writers were not left on their own to write their records of Jesus’ words and deeds. The Holy Spirit led them in this effort.

> The inspiration of Scripture is such a vital doctrine because it gives all of Scripture one ultimate author. So, when we look at the Gospels and we see four different authors give four different perspectives on Jesus, we need to appreciate those perspectives but realize the Holy Spirit inspired all of them. And so, they come with very different agendas, theologically, and audiences they’re writing to, and backgrounds and experiences with Jesus. But we have a wonderful unity in them while we have a diversity based on the human authorship. The inspiration of the Spirit in Scripture doesn’t remove the human element or the human work in that, but what it means is that God gets exactly what he wants through these human efforts.
> 
> — Dr. K. Erik Thoennes

Listen to Jesus’ words in John 14:25-26:

> All this I have spoken while still with you. But the Counselor, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, will teach you all things and will remind you of everything I have said to you (John 14:25-26).

	No matter how good Jesus’ disciples were at memorizing, they couldn’t have mastered everything. That is why Jesus promised and sent the Holy Spirit to his apostles. And the Holy Spirit enabled them to recall what the church throughout the centuries needed to know about what Jesus had done and said. As John wrote in 21:25 of his gospel:

> Jesus did many other things as well. If every one of them were written down, I suppose that even the whole world would not have room for the books that would be written (John 21:25).


> It’s interesting when you talk to people about who Jesus is and you ask them who Jesus is, some people might say he’s a rabbi, he’s a teacher, or some people might claim that if you look at different world religions and different groups, they claim many different things about him. But in the wisdom of God, God led, through his Holy Spirit, his eye witnesses to write the deposit of faith in four complimentary accounts so that we have in Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John — whether through the author himself or through his sources — we have a definitive eyewitness testimony, safeguarded by the Holy Spirit, which serves as a standard, so that if anyone says, “Well Jesus said this or Jesus would do this or Jesus wouldn’t do that,” we have written there the undeniable account we can go back to, and God has given us that touchstone for our faith.
> 
> — Dr. Robert L. Plummer
