## STATUS IN THE CHURCH

Now that we have spoken of the literary character of the Gospels, we are ready to turn to their status in the church as authoritative written texts. We will explore the Gospels’ status in the church by considering their composition and their authenticity as the word of God. Let’s turn first to their composition.


### COMPOSITION

When we speak of the composition of the Gospels, we have in mind the way they came to be written. Who were their authors? Why did they write these books? How did they write these books? Questions like these are important for Christians to explore because countless interpreters have focused on the human processes of composition to diminish the divine authority of these books. But the good news is that careful exploration gives us every reason to be confident that the Gospels are not only the works of human beings, but also the Word of God.
We’ll look at three matters related to the composition of the Gospels. First, we’ll explore the similarities between the various gospel accounts. Second, we’ll survey some theories of composition that have arisen to explain these similarities. And third, we’ll offer some comments regarding the certainty with which we should commit to these theories. Let’s begin by considering the similarities between the Gospels.


#### Similarities

While composed separately, the gospel accounts of Matthew, Mark, and Luke have often been grouped together and called the Synoptic Gospels. The term “synoptic” simply means, “seeing together,” and has been applied to these gospels because they cover largely the same material. They include many of the same accounts of Jesus’ words and deeds. And when they report the same sayings of Jesus, they often use exactly the same words. For instance, consider Jesus’ healing of a paralytic. In Matthew 9:6, we read this account of the Lord’s words and actions:

> “But so that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins…” Then he said to the paralytic, “Get up, take your mat and go home” (Matthew 9:6).

Now listen to Mark 2:10-11:

> “But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins…” He said to the paralytic, “I tell you, get up, take your mat and go home” (Mark 2:10-11).

And, again, In Luke 5:24, we read this:

> “But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins…” He said to the paralyzed man, “I tell you, get up, take your mat and go home” (Luke 5:24).

In this example, we see that each of the Synoptic Gospels contains an almost word-for-word account of the same miracle story. Other parallel stories found in at least two of the three Synoptic Gospels include: the healing of a leper, the exorcism of a demon in Capernaum, the healing of Peter’s mother-in-law, the calming of a storm at sea, the raising of Jairus’ dead daughter, the entrusting of authority to the Twelve, Jesus walking on water, the healing of a man’s withered hand, the feeding of five thousand people with a few loaves and a few fish, and Jesus’ transfiguration. 

> The three gospels, Matthew, Mark and Luke, are often known as the Synoptics because they actually look at things from, as it were, similar perspectives, similar glasses, if you like. And that can sometimes give the impression, why do we need three when one would be sufficient? It would be sad to lose any one of the three Synoptic Gospels because they do actually each contribute something slightly different, and it’s worth just seeing some of the differences between them. Mark’s gospel is the gospel, which has got far more color than some of the other gospels and actually tells some of the individual stories at greater length. Even though it’s a shorter gospel, its individual stories are told at greater length. It’s Matthew who’s then squeezed those stories into a much shorter compass because he’s trying to put so much more into his gospel. And in particular, Matthew is trying to put the teaching of Jesus, which Mark’s gospel, strangely, omits most of Jesus’ teaching. So, Matthew’s gospel gives us a very authoritative Jesus, a teaching Jesus, and if you want a kind of compact compendium of Jesus’ teaching, Matthew’s gospel is it. But what’s Luke given us? Well, Luke’s given us yet more teaching. Luke has given us the parables in particular — many more than Matthew — and he’s also given us a far more sort of human portrait of Jesus making contact with all kinds of people, a very inclusive, loving, caring Jesus. Some people think that Luke was not just a medical doctor, but was also something of a psychologist; he’s able to convey human emotion really well. And I think, therefore, in the three gospels, we’ve got three very precious, different texts, which we need to value each one of them.
> 
> — Dr. Peter Walker


> I think that the fundamental reason why we have three gospels that account for the life of Jesus in basically the same way is the richness and beauty of who Jesus is cannot be captured by a single account. So, when we think of what God intended, no single writer could exhaust for us the significance of what Jesus accomplished, what Jesus said, and what Jesus did. I also want to add to that, however, that we should be sensitive to the differences in the three gospels. Yes, they say essentially the same thing, but there are nuances and colors to each gospel. So, on the one hand they tell us the basic story of what Jesus did and what he accomplished, and at the same time, the gospels also show us different facets of Jesus. So, it’s sort of like a kaleidoscope, everything is within the kaleidoscope, and yet you look at it from different angles and we see different pictures of who Jesus is. So, we see the wisdom of God, the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, in giving us this multifaceted view of Jesus.
> 
> — Dr. Thomas R. Schreiner

In contrast to the Synoptic Gospels, much of the material of John’s gospel is unique. While John also recorded that Jesus walked on water and fed five thousand people, he included many events that are not recorded in the Synoptic Gospels. For example, John reported Jesus’ turning water into wine, Jesus’ conversation with the Samaritan woman, and Jesus’ raising of Lazarus from the dead. 
	But even though the stories of Jesus’ ministry and life vary among the four gospels, all four witness to Jesus’ baptism, Jesus’ last meal with his disciples, Jesus’ death on the cross, and Jesus’ resurrection from the dead. 
The similarities and differences among the Gospels have led to many competing explanations. So, now let’s turn to the theories of the Gospels’ composition.


#### Theories of Composition

	Because of the many similarities between the Synoptic Gospels, scholars have developed many theories regarding their compositional history. These theories are often rather complex and they can be confusing when we first begin to study them. We might summarize the most popular theories in this way: Most interpreters believe that Mark was written first, and that Matthew and Luke used materials from Mark and perhaps from other sources. But other interpreters believe that Matthew was written first, and that Mark used materials from Matthew, and that Luke used materials from both Matthew and Mark. Still others believe that both Matthew and Luke were based on sources we no longer have, and that Mark used material from both of them. As you can see, even comparing the general characteristics of these theories can be a little confusing.
 By contrast, the composition of John is fairly simple. Most interpreters agree that he wrote near the end of the first century, and was familiar with at least one and perhaps all of the synoptic accounts. It is sometimes suggested that he avoided repeating much of the material that he knew had already been mentioned in the Synoptics, and chose to provide additional information that was most relevant to the communities to which he ministered.
With these theories of composition in mind, let’s talk about the certainty with which we should hold to them. 
