#### Certainty	

At the outset, we should recognize that biblical authors often used oral and written traditions — and this didn’t compromise their inspiration or authority. So, there is nothing wrong in principle with believing that any of the gospel writers relied on prior source material. As Luke wrote in Luke 1:1-3:

> Many have undertaken to draw up an account of the things that have been fulfilled among us, just as they were handed down to us … Therefore, since I myself have carefully investigated everything from the beginning, it seemed good also to me to write an orderly account for you (Luke 1:1-3).

All the other gospel writers seem to have had access to similar sources, although they didn’t explicitly mention it the way Luke did. If we assume with the majority of interpreters that Mark wrote first, he didn’t have access to any previously written gospel, but he almost certainly used oral traditions, at least from his close friend Peter. Luke and Matthew probably used Mark’s gospel as a model. In addition to this, Matthew and John had their own recollection of Jesus’ life and teachings. And all four writers were infallibly superintended by the Holy Spirit, as we have seen previously. 
	In summary, we can appreciate the theories regarding the relationship between the gospels. But we should not feel the need to understand all their intricacies or to commit firmly to any one of them. What these theories offer us is the confidence that the gospel writers each had the ability to draw information from multiple sources, and to construct reliable accounts of Jesus’ life and teachings. When we see overlap in their accounts, we have the opportunity to consider the different perspectives of the evangelists, no matter which preceded the other. And when we read material that appears in only one of the Gospels, we can study it in light of that particular writer’s purposes. 
Having considered the composition of the four gospels, we are ready to address their authenticity.


### AUTHENTICITY
	
In the early centuries of the church, there were some disagreements about which books from the apostolic age truly belonged in the New Testament. Some early church leaders did not acknowledge all the books we now have in the New Testament. Others believed that we should include additional books beyond the twenty-seven that we have now. 
But these disputes did not involve the books of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John. These four gospels — and no others — were always received as genuine and authoritative by the faithful churches of God. 
	For example, the third century church father Origen, who lived from A.D. 185 to 254, argued that only the four gospels we now possess in the New Testament were authentic. 
Origen is quoted by the church historian Eusebius, who lived from about A.D. 263 to about 340. Listen to the words Eusebius attributed to Origen in his work Ecclesiastical History, book 6, chapter 25, section 4:

**The four gospels … are the only indisputable ones in the Church of God under heaven.**

In addition, a century earlier the church father Irenaeus, who lived from A.D 130 to 202, had spoken collectively of a four-fold gospel in his work Against Heresies, book 3, chapter 11, section 8. Listen to what he wrote:

**It is not possible that the Gospels can be either more or fewer in number than they are... He who was manifested to men that is, Jesus, has given us the Gospel under four aspects, but bound together by one Spirit.**

Irenaeus said he knew of no time when any of the four was disputed or when any other gospel than these four was used in worship in the church. 


#### Trustworthy Authors

There were at least three reasons for the early church’s bold confidence in these four gospels. First, the church received the Gospels as authentic because they were written by the trustworthy authors named in their titles. 
It is highly likely that the Gospels were originally anonymous. But it is also likely that when they were first published, they were received by people who knew the authors, or perhaps even distributed with letters identifying the authors. And from the earliest times, Christian writings associated the Gospels with the names Matthew, Mark, Luke and John — four men known from the New Testament as church leaders with good reputations. 


#### Apostolic Approval

Second, early Christians were also confident in the Gospels’ place in the canon from the fact that these books had apostolic approval. 
Matthew and John were apostles, eyewitnesses to the words and works of Jesus. Mark was thought to have received much of his material from Peter, who spoke affectionately of Mark as “My son” in 1 Peter 5:13. And as we have already seen, in Luke 1:1-4, Luke explained that he based his work on eyewitness accounts. 
Moreover, in his Ecclesiastical History, Eusebius reported that the Apostle John personally approved all three other gospels before writing his own. Listen to what Eusebius wrote about the apostle John in book 3, chapter 24, section 7 of his work:

The three gospels already mentioned Matthew, Mark and Luke having come into the hands of all and into his own too, they say that he accepted them and bore witness to their truthfulness.
	

#### Witness of the Church

And third, all four gospels are supported by the witness of the church in the first century. All four books are old enough that living eyewitnesses to Jesus’ life and ministry would have been able to reject or confirm their accounts. And as it happened, the eyewitnesses did confirm them by receiving the Gospels into the churches at a very early date.

> God testifies to his own voice in his Word. But for our help, we can look at historical events that are mentioned in Scripture, and we can see that they do correlate with what we know of history from other sources. On a more general plane, we can see that the social conditions, the political conditions, the geography, and all these other kinds of general things mentioned in the Bible, they are consistent with what we know about the historical period in which they were written, including first century Palestine when the Gospels were written. However, when we look at the specific historical things in the Bible and the historical conditions and circumstances they describe, it provides us a reasonable basis for knowing that they come from the time in which they say they come, and that with the Spirit’s testimony, we gain real confidence that they are the Word of God. So, in the first century and second century of the early church, the Gospels as we know them, the four canonical Gospels, were received universally as from apostles or from apostolic sources, and were regarded as faithful and reliable eyewitness testimony of what Jesus did and who he was and the things he taught.
> 
> — Rev. Michael J. Glodo



> There are a lot of reasons for believing that the Gospels are reliable, inspired, and have the facts, we might say, straight. But maybe the most important thing I can say is this: that the eyewitnesses sealed their testimony with their lives. You would think that before one of them was flogged, beaten, tossed into jail, crucified, just one of them would have said, “Oh by the way, you know, it’s really just a story.” They died for what they said. Now, of course we all know that people are willing to die… people die for lies all too often. The vast majority of all people who die for lies don’t know they are lies. A tiny number of people will die for a lie that they know to be a lie if it gained them immense power or wealth or prestige during their lifetime. They got none of that. They were nobodies in this world, they were constantly on the run, they were impoverished, they sacrificed, they were beaten, and then they died. And not one of them recanted their testimony. So, we can be pretty sure that it happened.
> 
> — Dr. Dan Doriani
