## UNITY

Now that we have examined the literary character of the Gospels and looked at their place in the church, we are ready to look at the unity between all four New Testament gospels.
We will consider the unity among the Gospels first by affirming that each book tells the same story of the kingdom of God, and second by exploring their emphasis on Jesus as the one who brings the kingdom of God. Let’s begin with the affirmation that the same over-arching story is related by each of the New Testament gospels.


### SAME STORY

In a general sense, we can say that the story that is told in the books of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John is the gospel. In fact, this is why the books themselves are referred to as “the Gospels.” They are the books that tell the gospel story. But what exactly is the gospel story?
	The word “gospel” translates the Greek word euangelion (εαγγέλιον) which simply means “good news.” So, when the Bible talks about the gospel of Jesus, it’s referring to the good news about Jesus. But what exactly is this good news? Who is Jesus? And what story do the Gospels tell about him?
	To answer these questions, we need to understand that the word “gospel” sometimes referred to a very specific type of news in the ancient world. Specifically, when warrior kings or emperors conquered new territories, they sometimes made imperial proclamations of their victories in announcements called “good news.” In this use of the term “gospel,” the “good news” was an announcement of a king’s victory and that his reign would bring blessings to his people. In fact, this is also how the term was sometimes used in the Old Testament. For instance, listen to words of Isaiah 52:7: 

> How beautiful on the mountains are the feet of those who bring good news, who proclaim peace, who bring good tidings, who proclaim salvation, who say to Zion, “Your God reigns!” (Isaiah 52:7).

In this passage, Isaiah envisioned the wondrous approach of messengers on the mountains surrounding Jerusalem announcing the good news that Israel’s time of exile was over. They announced peace and salvation because of the reign of God over all. 
	In the context of Isaiah’s prophecy, the reign of God — the building of his kingdom on earth — was the good news that the people of Israel and Judah needed to hear. It was the news that under God’s kingship, they would have rest from their enemies and live in God’s worldwide kingdom forever. 
But in Isaiah’s day, God had not done this yet. Isaiah’s prophecy looked forward to a day in the future when God would come in power as king over the whole earth. And the good news that Matthew, Mark, Luke and John told was that this day had finally been realized in Jesus. The gospel writers all told the same story, pointing back to Jesus as the one who had brought the kingdom of God, and who was fulfilling the Old Testament prophecies. They were messengers with beautiful feet who announced the good news that the kingdom of God had come to earth through its final king: Jesus. This one story of the coming of the kingdom provides the overarching unity that all four gospels share.
	In light of this fact, it should not be surprising to learn that the New Testament gospels use terms like “gospel” and “evangelize” far less frequently than language referring to God’s kingdom. Various forms of the word “gospel” appear in only 23 verses across Matthew, Mark, Luke and John. In contrast to this, phrases like “king,” “kingdom of God,” and Matthew’s special term “kingdom of heaven” are used around 150 times.
Now that we understand that all the Gospels tell the same story of the kingdom of God, let’s look at their emphasis on Jesus as the king who brings the kingdom of God. 

### JESUS

Our discussion of Jesus and the kingdom will divide into three parts. First, we’ll consider some proofs that the Gospels offer to demonstrate that Jesus brought the kingdom. Second, we’ll describe the vocabulary the Bible uses to talk about Jesus and the kingdom. And third, we’ll see that Jesus brings the kingdom in stages. Let’s begin with some proofs that Jesus brought the kingdom.


#### Proofs

There are many different ways that the Gospels assert the coming of the kingdom of God in Jesus. But for our purposes in this lesson, we’ll focus on just three. The first proof of the kingdom of God we will mention is Jesus’ power over demons. Listen to what Jesus said in Matthew 12:28:

> If I drive out demons by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God has come upon you (Matthew 12:28).

In this passage, Jesus had just exorcised a demon. And his ability to cast out demons proved that he had brought the kingdom of God.
A second way the Gospels demonstrate that God’s kingdom had come was through Jesus’ power to heal the sick and resurrect the dead. 
The Gospels regularly indicate that Jesus’ power to heal — as well as the same power that he gave to his disciples — was proof that he had brought the kingdom of God. We see this theme in Matthew 4:23-24, 8:5-13, and 10:7-8. We also see it in Luke 9:1-11, and 10:9 — and in many other places. The coming of the kingdom was also seen in Jesus’ authority to forgive sins. 
	Listen to what Isaiah prophesied about the coming Messiah in Isaiah 33:22-24:
	
> The Lord is our judge, the Lord is our lawgiver, the Lord is our king; it is he who will save us... No one living in Zion will say, “I am ill”; and the sins of those who dwell there will be forgiven (Isaiah 33:22-24).

Isaiah indicated that it was God’s royal prerogative to heal and to forgive. And he prophesied that healing and forgiveness would eventually come through the Messiah when the Messiah restored God’s kingdom on earth.
	And this is precisely what Jesus did. He called people to enter God’s kingdom. He offered them life instead of death. It was a message of salvation, a message of deliverance from sin. Listen to Jesus’ discussion in Mark 2:9-11: 

> “Which is easier: to say to the paralytic, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Get up, take your mat and walk’? But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins …” He said to the paralytic, “I tell you, get up, take your mat and go home” (Mark 2:9-11).

Jesus amazed everyone when he announced that, as the Son of Man in whom the kingdom was present, he had the authority on earth to forgive sin.
	In Jesus, God’s rule had come. God’s reign, God’s kingdom, was here on the earth. That meant blessings for God’s people. It meant that God’s peace, which Isaiah had prophesied so many years before, had finally come.
With these proofs in mind, let’s talk about the vocabulary the Gospels use to talk about Jesus and the kingdom.


#### Vocabulary

One reason Christians sometimes don’t immediately see the Gospels’ emphasis on the kingdom of God is that the gospel writers used so many different words to talk about it. Obviously, they used words like “king” and “kingdom.” But they also used words like “reign,” “rule,” “authority,” “throne,” “Son of David,” and many other words that pointed to God’s sovereignty and control.

> New Testament authors use a variety of vocabulary to talk about the kingdom of God, and not only explicit words, but they also use related concepts. So, we can see, for example, that a title for Jesus like Christos, which means “the Messiah,” “the Anointed One,” that speaks in Old Testament language about the king, the Son of David. Or we can see in a word like kurios, or Lord, a title again for Jesus, which again speaks of him as a king, as someone like Caesar. Caesar had that title as well. And so, within the context and time of the New Testament writers, people would understand the authority that’s conveyed by a word like “Lord.” Of course, the most important phrase that we have is the phrase “kingdom of God,” or in Matthew’s case, “kingdom of Heaven” in particular. And so that phrase would talk in two ways. One about a certain domain of Christ’s rule over his people, but also, it’s more of a verbal idea, sort of the reign of God, the authority of God ruling over his people. So, related concepts, like the concept of obedience for example, it isn’t explicit in terms of the kingdom of God, but it’s certainly implied in terms of the king’s authority and the kind of obedience and even worship that is called for in relation to Jesus.
> 
> — Dr. Gregory R. Perry

As just one example, the story of Jesus healing the paralyzed man in Mark 2:1-12 doesn’t use the words “king” or “kingdom.” Verse 10, however, forces us to see the kingdom meaning of the whole story when Jesus says, “The Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins.” The kingdom of God had come to earth in Jesus’ powerful acts of healing and words of forgiveness. In fact, against the backdrop of Old Testament prophesies describing the glorious, blessed nature of the kingdom of God, every good thing that Jesus did was a taste of God’s kingdom in one way or another.

> From the Old Testament expectation and hope for the kingdom of God, especially from the Book of Isaiah, the hope of God coming to rule and reign to establish His kingdom was the hope of a time of restoration, when all would be made right. And so one of the things that we see worked out in Jesus’ ministry and in the Gospels themselves is that Jesus’ healing ministry and his restoring of people, raising of dead sons, and stopping of hemorrhaging, of hemorrhaging of blood from people, and straightening broken limbs, and healing blind eyes. These are not only attestations to Jesus’ power and authority in an apologetic way, they certainly are that, they are not only manifestations of the power of God, they are in fact a witness to the hope that God’s reign, his restorative kingship, his restorative kingdom, is coming and has now come in Jesus. So, this is one of the many ways in which we see the Kingdom of God worked out, even apart from the language of the kingdom of God itself.
> 
> — Dr. Jonathan T. Pennington

Now that we have looked at some proofs that Jesus brought the kingdom of God, and considered the vocabulary the Gospels use to talk about Jesus’ kingdom, let’s briefly describe the stages in which Jesus brings the kingdom.
