#### Stages

Jesus taught that the present experience of the kingdom he offered was not the whole picture. Another stage of the kingdom was yet to come. At some point in the future, the kingdom of God would come in all of its fullness. Jesus described this future day in Luke 21:27-28:

At that time they will see the Son of Man coming in a cloud with power and great glory. When these things begin to take place, stand up and lift up your heads, because your redemption is drawing near (Luke 21:27-28).

Many Jewish theologians had interpreted the Old Testament to teach that when the Messiah came, he would do away with the old age of sin and death all at once, and replace it with the new age of the kingdom of God.
But Jesus indicated that he was bringing the kingdom in stages. He inaugurated the kingdom during his earthly ministry. The kingdom continues now as he reigns from heaven. And it will be consummated or completed in the future when he returns. 

> In apocalyptic Judaism, all of reality was divided into two periods: the present evil age and the age to come. And the expectation there is that when God ushered in his end-time kingdom, the age to come, it would happen cataclysmically, suddenly, and absolutely. You move immediately from the period before the kingdom to the period of the kingdom — the age of the kingdom. But in the New Testament, you have what I’ve called the elongation of New Testament eschatology, so that the age of the kingdom, as was envisaged in apocalyptic Judaism, is subdivided now into two periods: the present, or the “already” of the kingdom of heaven, and the “not yet” of the kingdom of heaven.
> 
> — Dr. David R. Bauer


> When we speak about the kingdom of God, we often talk about it as “having come,” but actually, we still anticipate the kingdom coming in the future. In fact, Jesus taught us to pray like that: “Your kingdom come now as it is in heaven.” And there is a sense in which, because the King has come, he’s inaugurated and set up his kingdom here on earth. But we wait for his return. The second coming of Christ will be the day in which all the full benefits of what Jesus did when he first came will — the implications will — be finally worked out. And there is the sense in which every believer has the job of announcing the King’s future coming as they go out into this world with the gospel. So, we call people to get ready for the day when Christ will return. But yet, as believers, we do enjoy the privilege of having Christ as our Lord now, so we live under his reign now but wait for the day when we will fully have that realized, not only for us, but actually for the whole of creation too.
> 
> —Rev. Dr. Simon Vibert

Not surprisingly, most Jews in the first century turned away from Jesus because the kingdom he described didn’t look like the kingdom they expected and wanted. They expected a king and a kingdom that would overthrow Rome and free the Jews from Roman oppression. When Jesus showed no interest in being that kind of king, many turned their backs and walked away, just as we see in Luke 17:20-25 and John 6:60-69. 
And of course, this rejection ultimately led to Jesus’ execution. The great irony of the Gospels is that Jesus’ death by crucifixion was at the same moment both the climax of the hostility against his kingship, and the victory of his kingship and kingdom. His resurrection and ascension were his path to his royal throne at the right hand of God the Father. This is why Jesus used the forty days between his resurrection and ascension to teach his disciples about the kingdom of God, as Luke reported in Acts 1:3. 
In Matthew 28:18, Jesus put it this way just before he ascended into heaven:

> All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me (Matthew 28:18).

The kingdom of God is the theme of good news that binds together the events of Jesus’ life in the Gospels. The Gospels proclaim the good news that God has kept his promise; that his kingdom has come in Jesus. And Jesus’ victorious life assures us that one day he will return to consummate his kingdom, bringing us all its blessings in all their fullness. 
