### DISTINCTIVE EMPHASES

Because each of the Gospels was written by a unique author who brought his own perspective and concerns to his account of Jesus’ life and ministry, there are differences among the four gospels. Knowing that each of the four gospels has been inspired by the Holy Spirit, we are confident that each account is free from error and therefore does not contradict the others. But that doesn’t mean that there are no differences. The Holy Spirit used the personalities, interests, and ministry situations of the human authors to shape those differences. So, if we want to be blessed in all the ways the Holy Spirit wants to bless us, we must take the gospel’s unique approaches into account when we read them.
	In many circumstances in life, we find that different people talk about the same truth in different ways. Anyone who has watched small children play knows that one event can have multiple, compatible interpretations. Each child has his or her own perspective on the games they played. Only by listening to each of them talk about the games can we piece together a picture of what really happened. One might be enthusiastic about the colors of the toys. Another might be more interested in describing the sounds they made. Another might excitedly report running around. These different perspectives do not contradict each other. But they do indicate that each child found some parts of the games more interesting than others. 
	In a similar way, each gospel writer’s own interests and concerns are reflected in his account of the gospel story. No two accounts look exactly the same. All the New Testament gospel stories describe the same Jesus, but they often speak about him in different ways and highlight different aspects of his ministry. 

> We have four gospels, but one Jesus. What should we make of that? Well, first of all, it’s the intelligence of the earliest Christians to recognize that Jesus was far too complex a historical figure to be subsumed under one portrait. The Gospels are like portraits, and so it’s recognizably Jesus in all four of the Canonical Gospels, but at the same time they are taking different angles of incidents into the character of Jesus in various ways. I’ll give you an example. In the Gospel of John, we have basically no parables and no exorcisms. In the Gospel of Mark, Jesus is characterized by parables, and the most frequent miracle in the early part of the Gospel of Mark is exorcisms. Well, these are different portraits and yet manifestly the same Jesus. And, each gospel writer has a slightly different point of view about Jesus. Not in the sense that one thinks he’s the Christ and another thinks he’s not, but that they have different emphases about how to reveal that Jesus was the Jewish Messiah and at the same time the Savior of the world. And so, they felt free, and they had the freedom under inspiration to emphasize different aspects and different portions of the ministry of Jesus, and different ways of framing the question and giving answers.
> 
> — Dr. Ben Witherington III

There are many distinctive characteristics and themes of the Gospels. But in this introductory lesson, we will focus on the way each gospel answers two questions: “Who is Jesus?” and “How do we follow Jesus?” Let’s begin by looking at how Matthew answers these important questions.



#### Who is Jesus in Matthew?

Of all the gospel writers, Matthew is the one who is most concerned to communicate that Jesus is the messianic king of Israel that was foretold in the Old Testament. 
A small sampling of the places Matthew mentions Jesus’ kingship includes: 2:2 in which the Magi asked where they could find the “one who has been born king of the Jews”; 7:21-23 in which, as Lord, Jesus said he would not admit all who call him “Lord” to the kingdom of heaven; 20:20-28 when the mother of the apostles James and John requested that her sons be given a privileged place alongside Jesus in the kingdom; 25:31-46 where Jesus told a parable about his judgment as King at the final day; and 27:37 in which Matthew ironically noted that the Roman soldiers put a sign above Jesus’ head at the cross that read, “This is Jesus, The King of the Jews.”
It was expected that God’s messianic king would bring to earth God’s messianic kingdom. He would deliver Israel from exile and her enemies. He would rule with righteousness, establishing peace and prosperity. Jesus did all this, but he did not do it in the way the Jews expected. Listen to Jesus’ words in Matthew 5:17:

> Do not think that I have come to abolish the Law or the Prophets. I have not come to abolish them but to fulfill them (Matthew 5:17).

Jesus understood that many Jews who witnessed his ministry would think that he was destroying the law of God and failing to fulfill the promises of the Old Testament. That’s why he said with emphatic clarity that he was fulfilling the Law and the prophets even if it didn’t look that way. 
Not only in this passage, but time after time, Matthew reported that Jesus fulfilled one aspect or another of the Old Testament Scriptures, demonstrating that he was truly the messianic king of Israel. 
	So, according to Matthew, how do we follow Jesus? Jesus perfectly kept the law of God, but that isn’t all he did. He said that keeping the outward demands of the law wasn’t enough. God has always required the citizens of his kingdom to obey him from the heart. The good news of the gospel is that the kingdom has come, bringing forgiveness and salvation to God’s people, and giving us new, obedient hearts. And our changed hearts give us both the power and the motivation to follow Jesus with a loving, thankful, joyful obedience. 

> When we talk about obeying God from the heart, the heart’s really an all-encompassing term. I teach my people it’s from head to heart to hand. It’s how we need to obey him and how we need to love him. Head would be the seat of the imagination, the seat of the mind, and we’re supposed to love God with all of our mind. We’re supposed to love God with all of our affections. And we’re supposed to love God with all of our hands and feet. So, heart doesn’t mean just something in your chest that’s thumping away. It’s an all-encompassing term. So, do we love God outwardly? Well, indeed we do. But it’s also with our affections that we love God. We love God with everything, and I believe that word “heart” points right to that everything.
> 
> — Dr. Matt Friedeman

Now that we have seen how Matthew’s gospel answers our two questions, let’s explore what Mark has to say. 
