#### Who is Jesus in Mark?

First, according to Mark, who is Jesus? Throughout his account, Mark emphasized that Jesus was the suffering Son of God who conquered the enemies of God’s people. Mark recorded many instances of Jesus’ miracles showing his power over the forces of evil. Even though Mark is far shorter than Matthew and Luke’s gospels, it records almost as many miracles — eighteen in all.
	From the very start of Mark’s gospel we see that Jesus was the conquering and suffering Son of God. In the first chapter alone, John the Baptist prophesied Jesus’ coming, and then Jesus began his public ministry. He was baptized, was tempted in the desert, called his first disciples, drove out evil spirits, and healed many people from various sicknesses. Even a superficial reading of this action-packed, rapid-fire narrative shows that Jesus was powerfully conquering the enemies of God’s kingdom. A closer reading also shows that Mark portrayed him as the suffering Son of God right from the beginning of his ministry. For instance, in Mark 1:12-13 we read this account following Jesus’ baptism:

> At once the Spirit sent him out into the desert, and he was in the desert forty days, being tempted by Satan. He was with the wild animals, and angels attended him (Mark 1:12-13).

Jesus suffered the onslaught of Satan’s attacks from the first moment of his public ministry. And this picture of Jesus as suffering servant continued to grow throughout Mark’s gospel as Jesus endured persecutions and rejection.
	So, how does Mark say that we should follow Jesus, the suffering conqueror? On one hand, Mark’s gospel does not sugar-coat the Christian life. Mark described discipleship as a difficult and often frustrating process in which we not only suffer, but also make mistakes and fail. In fact, a distinctive trait of Mark’s gospel is how often Jesus’ disciples failed to understand him or to respond in faith. In Mark 4:40 Jesus wondered if his disciples had faith at all; in 6:52, the disciples’ “hearts were hardened”; in 7:18, Jesus accused his disciples of being “dull” because they failed to understand his teachings; in 9:18 the disciples were unable to drive out an evil spirit; in 9:38-41 the disciples mistakenly attempted to hinder an exorcist because they didn’t know him; and in the course of chapter 14, one disciple betrayed Jesus to the authorities, one denied all association with Jesus, and the rest abandoned him. 
	This emphasis in Mark’s gospel teaches us at least two things about following Jesus. First, just like the disciples, we won’t always understand Jesus. In fact, we’re likely to misunderstand many things in the Bible. So, we need to be humble enough to recognize that we all have much to learn. As part of this, we need to receive the Bible’s teaching by faith, knowing that God’s word is true even if it seems strange or wrong to us.
	And second, difficulties and suffering are inevitable for Christians. There are many dangers, many temptations to turn away from following him.  
Listen to what Jesus said in Mark 8:34-35:

> If anyone would come after me, he must deny himself and take up his cross and follow me. For whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for me and for the gospel will save it (Mark 8:34-35).

Jesus taught that we need to be faithful in our commitment to him. We have to be willing to suffer as Jesus suffered, to stand against temptation and spiritual attacks. But notice something else in this passage: Jesus is not only the suffering Son of God; he is also the conquering Son of God. In fact, he conquers through his suffering death. And if we follow him faithfully in suffering for the kingdom, we will be rewarded with eternal life. 

> Suffering has the effect of focusing our awareness on what is truly important, of getting us — because of pain — getting us to realize, this is not all that there is. There’s something more that I’m living for, and I still trust God in the midst of it because I know that the reality of what I have in Christ is greater than my comfort, my safety, and my happiness and those that I care about.
> 
> — Dr. John E. McKinley


> Jesus came as a suffering servant. And anyone who would follow Christ needs to have a place in their lives for significant suffering. This is so much a part of who Jesus is that when we come to this world that is so filled with suffering, if we are to be part of Christ’s ministry, we need to have a place for suffering in our own lives. Not only our own suffering, but the suffering of other people, that we actually grieve with those who grieve, and invite their suffering into our lives as well, and become part of that and ministers in that context. And when we enter into this world with a category for suffering and recognition that it’s one of the main ways that God wants us to minister as we follow Christ, we’re starting to understand the heart of God. And then, God refines us. This suffering produces character, it produces hope, it produces perseverance. And so, we are able to see God working in refining ways in our lives, in the midst of suffering as much, if not more, than any way else.
> 
> — Dr. K. Erik Thoennes
 
With Matthew and Mark in mind, let’s consider how Luke answers our questions about Jesus and his followers.


#### Who is Jesus in Luke?

Luke’s gospel answers the question “Who is Jesus?” by proclaiming that he is the compassionate Savior of the world. Jesus brought God’s salvation to the rich and the poor alike, to the religious leaders and to the social outcasts. Jesus’ good news was for everyone — even for the unnoticed and the despised. Luke emphasized this in many ways. Jesus honored the sisters Mary and Martha in a time when many men considered women inferior. Luke recorded parables and narratives that presented women, the sick and the crippled, and even non-Jews, as worthy of praise and imitation. Jesus praised the widow who gave her small life’s savings at the temple. Luke told the story of the despised tax collector Zacchaeus, whose response to Jesus was a model for all Luke’s readers. Time after time, Luke recorded Jesus’ concerns for those that society rejected or overlooked. As just one example, listen to this account from Luke 7:12-16:

> As [Jesus] approached the town gate, a dead person was being carried out — the only son of his mother, and she was a widow... When the Lord saw her, his heart went out to her and he said, “Don’t cry.” Then he went up and touched the coffin, and those carrying it stood still. He said, “Young man, I say to you, get up!” The dead man sat up and began to talk, and Jesus gave him back to his mother. They were all filled with awe and praised God. “A great prophet has appeared among us,” they said. “God has come to help his people” (Luke 7:12-16).

In the first-century Roman world, a widow who had lost her son would have had little means of provision, and little opportunity to find work. By emphasizing Jesus’ compassion for her, Luke pointed out that the Lord’s work as a savior was intended even for the poor and helpless. As the people at the end of this account commented, Jesus’ ministry to the needy and powerless was proof that God had come to help his people.
	So, how does Luke’s gospel answer the second question: How do we follow Jesus? Well, in keeping with Luke’s concern for the poor, one thing we can do is have compassion on others. We should care for the poor, and strive to meet their needs. We should be willing to give our possessions, food, money and time to sustain them. In fact, God often sends charitable Christians in answer to the prayers of the needy. As Jesus said in Luke 12:33:

> Sell your possessions and give to the poor. Provide purses for yourselves that will not wear out, a treasure in heaven that will not be exhausted, where no thief comes near and no moth destroys (Luke 12:33).

When we follow Jesus faithfully by caring for his people, he rewards us with an eternal inheritance.
	Another way we can follow Jesus is by resting confidently in the fact that God will meet our needs too. 
Listen to Jesus’ words in Luke 12:22-31:

> Do not worry about your life, what you will eat; or about your body, what you will wear… And do not set your heart on what you will eat or drink; do not worry about it... But seek his kingdom, and these things will be given to you as well (Luke 12:22-31).

As members of God’s kingdom, we can be confident that our great king Jesus Christ will care for us and meet our needs.
	And this emphasis on trusting the Savior is closely related to two other themes in Luke’s gospel: peace and joy. For instance, near the beginning of Luke’s gospel, in Luke 2:10-14, we read this angelic announcement:

> I bring you good news of great joy … Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace (Luke 2:10-14).

And twenty-two chapters later, Luke ended his gospel the same way he began it. At the end of his story, the disciples were following Jesus and experiencing the joy that the angels had prophesied back in chapter 2.

> Three times in that conversation, in John 20, Jesus says, “Peace be with you.” And I don’t think he was saying hello. I think he was saying this is the foundation of reality. Even though you’ve just been through agony, you’ve lost the one you love, and you never knew I was going to come back, you’re going to soon be under the Romans’ dictatorship, you’ve lived under oppression, it’s going to get much worse, I want you to know that I’m here, and when I’m here, I bring a fundamental peace. I am your joy. So that no matter what happens, no matter what happens in your outward life, no matter what’s inside your life, if you know me, there’s a foundation of real peace. The biblical word is “shalom," this holistic righteous reign and rule of God no matter what comes down the pike. And, I bring joy. I’m not just here to mollify you. I’m here to bring you real joy, joy that is more than emotion. Joy that is a positive understanding that I am in control of all the world, and that I will let nothing happen to you that doesn’t come through me first, Jesus says. I love the way Paul says it when he talks about the fruit of the Spirit. He says when the Holy Spirit comes to fill up Christians’ lives, all of you will love; the next word is, you’ll have joy. And I think that those are inseparable. Of course, he adds six other things, but the major thing is that when the love of God is shed or brought in my heart, the response is, I don’t then live by my own understanding of reality, which would be probably pretty cynical, pretty pessimistic, pretty negative. But when Jesus is present, the only response is, I’m at peace. He has brought his resurrection power to my life, and I have joy, I have hope, because in Jesus, there is no defeat. There is no “things coming apart.” He brings all things together, holistically, completely.
> 
> — Dr. Bill Ury

Listen to Luke’s final words in 24:52-53:

> Then they worshipped him and returned to Jerusalem with great joy. And they stayed continually at the temple, praising God (Luke 24:52-53).

In Luke’s gospel, following Jesus means rejoicing in our salvation and all of God’s blessings, peacefully resting in him, trusting in him to meet all our needs, and being willing to be used by him to bring these same blessings to others.
	Having seen how Matthew, Mark, and Luke answer the questions, “Who is Jesus?” and “How do we follow him?”, we’re ready to consider how John uniquely answered these questions. 
