## CONCLUSION
 
In this lesson, we have been introduced to the study of the Gospels. We have seen their literary character, noting that the Gospels are reliable historical narratives. We have also considered their status in the church, seeing that they are an authentic part of the New Testament Scriptures. And we have looked at them in comparison to one another, finding that they all tell the same story of the kingdom of God, even though each portrays Jesus and discipleship in its own distinctive way. 
	Understanding the Gospels is critical for every Christian. We place all our confidence in this life and the next in the hands of Jesus, whom we have never seen face-to-face. Everything we know about him, we know through his Word — especially the Gospels. Hopefully, the things we have learned in this introductory lesson have prepared us to explore each of the four gospels in much more depth, in order to understand how each evangelist’s message impacts our faith and life. 
 
## CONTRIBUTORS

Dr. Pete Alwinson (Host) is the Executive Director of FORGE: City Wide Ministry to Men with Man in the Mirror. He is also the founding pastor of Willow Creek Presbyterian Church (PCA) in Winter Springs, FL, where he served as Senior Pastor for 26 years. Dr. Alwinson received his M.Div. from Trinity Evangelical Divinity School and his D.Min. from Reformed Theological Seminary. He is an Adjunct Professor at Reformed Theological Seminary, a Board Member of Key Life Network, and the author of Like Father, Like Son: How Knowing God as Father Changes Men. 


Dr. Richard Bauckham is a New Testament scholar and author and is Professor Emeritus at the University of St. Andrews in Scotland.

Dr. David R. Bauer is Dean of the School of Biblical Interpretation and the Ralph Waldo Beeson Professor of Inductive Biblical Studies at Asbury Theological Seminary.

Dr. Steven Cowan is Professor of Philosophy and Religion at Lincoln Memorial University and is on staff with the Apologetics Resource Center, having served previously as Associate Professor of Philosophy and Apologetics at Birmingham Theological Seminary.

Dr. Dan Doriani is Professor of Biblical and Systematic Theology and Vice President at Large at Covenant Theological Seminary in St. Louis and a Council member of The Gospel Coalition.

Dr. Matt Friedeman is Professor of Evangelism and Discipleship at Wesley Biblical Seminary.

Rev. Michael J. Glodo is Associate Professor of Pastoral Theology at Reformed Theological Seminary in Orlando, Florida.

Dr. John E. McKinley is Associate Professor of Biblical and Theological Studies at Talbot School of Theology.

Dr. Jonathan T. Pennington is Associate Professor of New Testament Interpretation and the Director of Research Doctoral Studies at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.

Dr. Gregory R. Perry is Vice President for Strategic Projects at Third Millennium Ministries and President of Thirdmill Seminary. He served previously as Associate Professor of New Testament and the Director of City Ministry Initiative at Covenant Theological Seminary.

Dr. Robert L. Plummer is Collin and Evelyn Aikman Professor of Biblical Studies at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary and the Founder and Host of The Daily Dose of Greek screencast.

Dr. David A. Redelings is Professor of New Testament at Bethel Seminary.

Dr. Thomas R. Schreiner is the James Buchanan Harrison Professor of New Testament Interpretation and Associate Dean of Scripture and Interpretation at The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.

Dr. K. Erik Thoennes is Professor of Biblical and Theological Studies at Biola University’s Talbot School of Theology and is Chair of the Biblical and Theological Studies Theology Department.

Dr. Steven Tsoukalas is Professor and Department Chair of Apologetics and World Religions at Emmaus Biblical Seminary in Haiti and formerly taught Wesley Biblical Seminary.

Dr. Bill Ury was Professor of Systematic and Historical Theology at Wesley Biblical Seminary for 24 years and now serves as Pastor of Elizabeth City Evangelical Methodist Church in North Carolina.

Rev. Dr. Simon Vibert is Vicar of Christ Church Virginia Water in Surrey, England, and the former Vice Principal and Director of the School of Preaching at Wycliffe Hall, Oxford.

Dr. Peter Walker has served as Professor of Biblical Studies at Trinity School for Ministry and as Associate Vice-Principal at Wycliffe Hall, Oxford. He is currently an instructor with Jerusalem Center for Biblical Studies.

Dr. Ben Witherington III is Amos Professor of New Testament for Doctoral Studies at Asbury Theological Seminary.

 
## GLOSSARY
 
 
christos – Greek word (transliteration) for Christ; used in the Septuagint to translate "mashiach" or "messiah," meaning "anointed one"

covenant – A binding legal agreement made between two people or groups of people, or between God and a person or group of people

euangelion – Greek word (transliteration) for "gospel"; literally "good news"

Eusebius – (A.D. 263-340) Early Christian historian who wrote Ecclesiastical History

genre – A category or type of literature

gospel – Literally, "good news"; announcement that God's kingdom came to earth through the person and work of Jesus and that it expands toward its great consummation as God grants salvation to those who receive and trust in Jesus as the Messiah

Gospels, the – The New Testament books of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John

historical narratives – Stories that record events that took place in the past

Irenaeus – (ca. A.D. 130-202) Second-century bishop and early Christian writer who wrote Against Heresies in which he refuted Gnosticism and affirmed the validity of the four gospels

John – Son of Zebedee and brother of James; one of the twelve Apostles; author of the Gospel of John; 1, 2, 3 John; and the book of Revelation; sometimes called "the disciple Jesus loved"

Josephus – (A.D. 37- ca. 100) Jewish historian from the 1st century A.D. who wrote Antiquities

kurios – Greek word (transliteration) meaning "lord," "ruler," "master" or "sir"; a name for God in the New Testament 

Luke – Author of the third gospel and the book of Acts; a Gentile convert to Christianity and one of Paul's co-workers; believed to have been a physician

Mark – Also known as John Mark; author of the Gospel of Mark and cousin of Barnabas; accompanied Paul and Barnabas on their first missionary journey

Matthew – One of the twelve Apostles and author of the Gospel of Matthew; a tax collector when Jesus called him; also known as Levi

Messiah – Hebrew word meaning "anointed one"; the great King from David’s royal line who would bring about the transition from this age to the age to come; translated "Christos" in Greek

Origen – (ca. A.D. 185 - 254) Early Christian theologian from Alexandria; his works include: On First Principles, in which he defended the Scriptures as our final authority for Christian doctrine, and the Hexapla, a comparative study of various translations of the Old Testament

Peter – One of Jesus' twelve apostles; also called Simon; a leader in the early Christian church; preached on the Day of Pentecost in Acts 2; according to church historians, Mark relied on Peter's accounts of Christ's life to write his gospel
 

Plutarch – (ca. A.D. 46-120) Secular Greek historian and biographer  

Son of David – Messianic title that referred to David’s long-awaited, righteous descendant who would save God’s people; frequently applied to Jesus in the New Testament (especially in Matthew)

synoptic – Term meaning "seen together"; used when referring to the gospels of Matthew, Mark and Luke because of their similarities

talmid – Hebrew word (transliteration) meaning “disciple”; a student or learner

Talmud – Collection of rabbinic teachings on Jewish civil and ceremonial law spanning approximately 600 years, beginning in the first century A.D.

Yahweh – Hebrew name for God that comes from the phrase, "I am that I am"; often translated "LORD"
 


