# Study Guide 
# Old Testament Foundations
# Module Six – The Life of Abraham – Structure, Content and Original Meaning

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for this course’s final exam.

**********************************

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 – 20:51

Introduction	
                     
I. Literary Design
                 
      A. Genesis
   
      B. Abraham
  
                               
## REVIEW QUESTIONS
             
1. Why do nations normally pass on memories from generation to generation?
             
2. According to the lesson, what was the intention of the biblical authors as they recorded history? How did this affect the accuracy of their records?
             
3. How does Dr. Pratt prefer to divide Genesis into sections for the purpose of making an outline?
                 
4. Why does Dr. Pratt not include Isaac as a division of the section of early patriarchal history?
             
5. List the 17 episodes in the life of Abraham, as Dr. Pratt names them. Explain how these episodes are related to each other.
               
6. List the names of the five "clusters" of episodes in the life of Abraham, as Dr. Pratt divides them. Explain the symmetry of their arrangement.
             
                



 
## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 20:51 – 48:33 End of first lesson in this Module
                
II. Major Themes
                
      A. Key Passage 
                
      B. Unfolding 
    
1. Divine Grace 
                
2. Abraham’s Loyalty 
                
3. Blessings to Abraham 
                
4. Blessings through Abraham 
                
Conclusion 


## REVIEW QUESTIONS
    
1. According to Dr. Pratt, what is the key passage in the Genesis account of Abraham? Write out these verses. Make sure you are very familiar with their contents. Explain how these key verses are organized.
            
2. Explain the apparent contradiction between Acts 7:2-4 and the Genesis account of the life of Abraham. How does Dr. Pratt deal with this?
            
3. List the major themes in the biblical account of the life of Abraham, as given in the lesson and give a brief explanation of each one.

