## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 – 28:12 of the second lesson in this Module
        
Introduction 
        
I. Connections 
        
      A. Definition 
        
      B. Types 
        
1. Backgrounds 
        
2. Models 
        
3. Foreshadows 
        
      C. Summation 
  
   
## REVIEW QUESTIONS
    
1. What is Dr. Pratt's opinion about the author of Genesis?
    
2. Dr. Pratt says that when Moses wrote about Abraham, he was making "connections" between "that world" and "their world." What does he mean by this?
    
3. According to the lesson, how did Moses make use of the BACKGROUND of Abraham to try to encourage the Israelites to continue on to Canaan after the exodus?
    
4. According to the lesson, how did Moses make use of Abraham as a MODEL to try to encourage the Israelites to continue on to Canaan after the exodus?
    
5. What does Dr. Pratt mean by a "foreshadow"? Explain the two foreshadows from the life of Abraham that are mentioned in the lesson.
    
6. Give the example from each period of Abraham's life of how Moses made a connection between Abraham many years ago and Israel at the time of Moses.
    

 
## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 28:12 – 1:06:44
        
II. Implications 
        
      A. Basic Impact 
        
      B. Major Themes 
        
1. Divine Grace 
        
2. Abraham’s Loyalty 
        
3. Blessings to Abraham 
        
4. Blessings through Abraham 
        
      C. Five Steps 
        
1. Background and Early Experiences 
        
2. Early Contacts with Others 
        
3. Covenant with God 
        
4. Later Contacts with Others 
        
5. Progeny and Death 
        
Conclusion 
   
           
## REVIEW QUESTIONS
        
1. According to Dr. Pratt, what is the main reason Moses wrote about Abraham?
        
2. Moses touched four major themes as he wrote about Abraham. Describe each need in Israel that he is addressing as he touches each of these themes.
    
3. Moses wrote about Abraham's BACKGROUND AND EARLY EXPERIENCES, in order to make applications for Israel in his time. Describe the practical implication that Moses makes from each episode of this stage in the life of Abraham.
    
4. Moses wrote about Abraham's EARLY CONTACTS WITH OTHERS, in order to make applications for Israel in his time. List the name of each episode and describe the practical implication Moses makes from each episode of this stage in the life of Abraham.
    
5. Moses wrote about the COVENANT OF GOD with Abraham, in order to make applications for Israel in his time. List the name of each episode and describe the practical implication Moses makes from each episode in this stage of Abraham's life.
    
6. Moses wrote about the LATER CONTACTS of Abraham with others, in order to make applications for Israel in his time. List the name of each episode and describe the practical implication Moses makes from each episode in this stage of Abraham's life.
    
7. Moses wrote about the PROGENY AND DEATH of Abraham, in order to make applications for Israel in his time. List the name of each episode and describe the practical implication Moses makes from each episode in this stage of Abraham's life.
