# Old Testament Foundations – Module Two – A Perfect World
## Discussion Questions 

1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	In what two ways is Gen. 1:1-2:3 inspired? Explain.


3.	Explain the background of the chapters in terms of availability and interaction.


4.	In contrast to the other creation stories in Moses’ day God’s spoken word alone brought order and restrained the chaos. How does the way in which God created cause you to worship him?


5.	What can we learn about God from the way he carried out the creation process?


6.	In what ways have you seen God’s special power in your life, reminding you of His power in creation and His power in delivering Israel from Egypt and settling them in the Promised Land?


7.	How would you like to experience more of God’s power in your life?


8.	The Israelites failed to recognize God’s blessings in the Promised Land instead they thought Egypt was pretty good. In what ways are we tempted to not recognize the blessings of Christ’s inauguration and possibly settle for ‘pretty good’?


9.	When Paul spoke in 2 Cor. 5:17 that believers are a new creation he indicated that believers become a part of a new realm, a new world. How does it make you feel that you are not only a new creation but part of a newly created realm?


10.	Dr. Pratt mentioned that Christians often disconnect their eternal hope from the creation. In other words we assume we will spend eternity in the spiritual world of heaven. However, the NT teaches that our eternal destiny will be in the new heavens and new earth. How does the NT teaching of a re-created universe affect your view of the world today?

REVIEW STATEMENT on A PERFECT WORLD - ORIGINAL MEANING: The creation account has three major steps: a beginning, a middle and an ending. These can be summarized as follows: (1) the dark and chaotic world, (2) overcoming the chaos through God's authoritative word, his forming and his filling, and (3) arriving at the glorious end — the Sabbath. Remember that creation occurred before the fall. The dark and chaotic world was not evil. God created it that way. Why? To give us a paradigm or way of thinking about life in his world: it's an adventure in which we must trust God as we face challenges that need to be faced and overcome! Even before the fall Adam and his descendants were commanded to imitate God under his authority by subduing (forming) the Earth, filling it with children and ruling over it in his name. In Hebrew the word "subdue" means "to obligate to serve, by force if necessary." So even in a sinless world, there are challenges that must be faced. Then after the fall we see the same paradigms in the Exodus, now complicated by sin. An unfolding adventure is built into God's creation.

CASE STUDY: When we read about the life of Joseph in the book of Genesis, it comes across as an exciting adventure. Joseph was highly regarded by his father, but sold into slavery by his brothers and unjustly put into prison in Egypt. Yet he eventually becomes the second most powerful man in Egypt and God uses him to save many people, including his family through whom Christ would eventually be born. I suspect that as most of these events were unfolding, Joseph didn't see his life as a great adventure but rather as a mess and a failure. But God is about adventure, and was at work in Joseph's life in ways that were often imperceptible to him, turning his life into a great adventure.
## Reflection Questions 	
1.	"Adventure" should not be viewed as a worldly, non-Christian idea. Yes, it's been taken by unbelievers and developed in less-than-perfect ways. But even this self-centered distortion is still a reflection of the God of adventure. In my culture, the church has been relegated to "boring" while the unbelieving world is presented as an interesting and great adventure. How does your culture view Christianity in this regard? Give evidence for your answers.
2.	Have you ever thought of the Christian life as an adventure that begins in one state of existence and ends in a much more glorious one? Does Christianity as a great adventure sound exciting to you? Explain your answer.
## Action Assignments
•	Have a discussion on this idea of Christian adventure with other people. When you are done, write up a summary of what people said. 
•	Ask some unbelievers how they see and feel about Christianity in this regard. 
•	Talk about your reflection on this with other believers and see what they think and how they feel.

