## DEFINITIONS

Christians use the word “theology” so much that you might think we all agree on what it means. But throughout the centuries leading theologians have promoted different concepts of Christian theology. The word itself derives from ancient Greek philosophy before the days of Jesus, but it never appears in the Scriptures. It isn’t found in the Septuagint — the ancient Greek translation of the Old Testament — nor does it appear in the New Testament. This is probably because the word “theology” had pagan connotations that were unacceptable to early believers. Even so, Christians began to adopt the term “theology” not long after the time of the New Testament, and it’s become a regular term in our Christian vocabulary today. Of course, throughout the millennia, we’ve understood what it means in different ways. So, it’s important to clarify from the outset the concept of theology that we will follow in this series. 
We’ll discuss the definitions of theology in three ways. First, we’ll introduce four typical definitions. Second, we’ll describe the tendencies that these definitions exemplify. And third, we’ll touch on some evaluations of the strengths and weaknesses of these tendencies. Let’s get started by noting four typical definitions of the term “theology.” 

### TYPICAL DEFINITIONS

According to Romans 1, there’s a sense in which all human beings are involved with theology every day of their lives. Here, Paul explained that, from the beginning, God’s invisible attributes and his moral requirements have been revealed to the human race through creation. When confronted with God’s revelation in creation, even unbelievers, however unconsciously at times, reflect on God and his just requirements. And believers, no matter when or where they live, spend much of their time with thoughts of God. Yet, in this series, we want to focus on theology as a more formal task — a task performed by people who make a concerted and well-informed effort to pursue theology as a discipline of study. 
There are countless ways that both Christians and non-Christians have defined the formal discipline of theology. But for our purposes here, we’ll limit ourselves to just a sampling of typical definitions from four respected Christian theologians: Thomas Aquinas, Charles Hodge, William Ames and the contemporary theologian John Frame. Consider first how Thomas Aquinas defined theology.


#### Thomas Aquinas

Thomas Aquinas, the renowned Roman Catholic theologian who lived from around 1225 to 1274, represents a very traditional definition of theology. His outlooks grew out of the practices of theologians who lived before him, and his views continue to influence theologians in many branches of the church, even today. 

> Thomas is a huge inspiration to me, because Thomas models for us how we could approach, on the one hand, the sacred texts of Scripture and the teachings of Christianity and the desire to be faithful to this, and at the same time all of the input, all of the data, all of the research, all of the movements in mainstream philosophy and science of your day as well. Thomas was known as the great synthesizer because of the way he brought Aristotelian thought and Christian thought together, which at the time, nobody thought you could do that. Aristotle had kind of been forgotten about. He’d been reintroduced to the western world through the Arabs who’d translated him into Latin so that everybody could read him again. And when Aristotle was rediscovered, there was a bit of a panic in Christendom at this moment because everybody recognized that Aristotle was a genius. He was brilliant. He had written on everything, I mean, literally everything. And then, thirdly, it looked like everything Aristotle was saying was at odds with Christianity, and that, therefore, could somehow disprove Christianity. And along comes Thomas who takes this stuff very, very seriously — this philosophy, very, very seriously — and at the same time he maintains his orthodoxy. He maintains a strong, deep, not just ideological commitment to Christianity, but a spiritual commitment to Christianity as well. And he begins working on the intersection between these two.
> 
> — Dr. James K. Dew, Jr. 

In Part 1, Question 1, Article 7 of his well-known Summa Theologica, Aquinas called theology “sacred doctrine” and defined it as: 

> [a unified] science [in which] all things are treated under the aspect of God: either because they are God Himself or because they refer to God

Two dimensions of this definition deserve special attention. Notice first that Aquinas identified theology as a “science.” 
Now, here, Aquinas didn’t refer to science in the modern sense of the word. Rather, he used the term “science” in the older and broader sense of “an intellectual or scholarly pursuit.” In this sense, theology is an academic task with a rather specific goal. Much like people study biology, psychology, literature, law or history, theologians pursue theology as an academic discipline. 
In Aquinas’ view, the theologian’s task was primarily to think, speak or write about doctrines or concepts. Of course, Aquinas believed that theology should have practical influences on every dimension of the Christian life. But he primarily conceived of theology as a science, an intellectual pursuit. 
In addition to theology being a unified science, Aquinas determined that the discipline of theology focuses on two main subjects. On the one hand, theologians address issues pertaining to “God himself.” 
For instance, theologians formulate what they believe about matters such as the attributes of God — his omniscience, his omnipresence, his holiness and the like — as well as his plan and works. We often call these and similar topics the study of “theology proper.” God himself is the object we study.
On the other hand, for Aquinas, the discipline of theology is also the study of other subjects in ways that “refer to God.” These subjects are often discussed in other disciplines without reference to God, but theologians study them in relation to God. For instance, eschatology, the study of last things, is an important subject in what we may call “general theology.” And Christian teachings about the nature of human beings, evil and sin, redemption, and similar topics all fall under the rubric of theology as well, even though they’re not theology proper. 
With Aquinas’ typical definition of theology in mind, let’s consider a similar point of view from the Protestant theologian Charles Hodge, who lived from 1797 to 1878. 


#### Charles Hodge

Although Protestant theologians have differed from their Roman Catholic counterparts in many ways, by and large, they haven’t greatly altered the basic definition of theology. Charles Hodge of Princeton defined theology in the Introduction to his Systematic Theology, chapter 2, section 1, as: 

**the science of the facts of divine revelation so far as those facts concern the nature of God and our relation to him
**
We can see here that Hodge’s definition is very similar to Aquinas’ definition. Both Aquinas and Hodge described theology as a “science.” Like Aquinas, Hodge viewed theology mainly as an academic discipline. In fact, he even went so far as to use the methods of natural or physical science in his day as a model for theologians to follow. Listen to the way Hodge compared theology with natural science in the Introduction of Systematic Theology, chapter 1, section 1: 

**The Bible is no more a system of theology than nature is a system of chemistry or of mechanics. We find in nature the facts which the chemist or the mechanical philosopher has to examine … to ascertain the laws by which they are determined. So, the Bible contains the truths which the theologian has to collect, authenticate, arrange, and exhibit in their internal relation to each other.**


> Charles Hodge was a man of the 1800s, and in the 1800s the word “science” was used more broadly than it is today. To modern ears the idea of theology as a science sounds jarring because we think of science as the hard sciences. But in the 1800s science was an organized, systematic, focused body of knowledge that was focused on a particular area of inquiry. So, Hodge opens his systematic theology by referring to sciences in his day, such as history, science of geography. We wouldn’t think of those as sciences today, but in his day, they were sciences. Also, in his day, science and the scientific method had accomplished so very much in the century before him that it was very much esteemed as a method for gaining knowledge. But in addition to that, he wanted to emphasize that theology is the organization of facts; it’s not simply the accumulation of facts. So, just like in astronomy, an astronomer doesn’t simply look at the celestial bodies and make a list of facts about them. He or she tries to organize those facts into a coherent system, and that is astronomy. In theology, the theologian looks at the facts of the Bible and doesn’t just list the facts of the Bible, but takes those facts of the Bible and organizes them into a system so that we can appreciate the interrelatedness of all those facts each to the others.
> 
> — Dr. Larry Trotter 

For Hodge, the task of the theologian was to approach the Bible much like a scientist approaches nature. He was to gather, analyze and organize the facts of Scripture. Now, Hodge also believed that theology should be applied to Christian living. But, like Aquinas, Hodge didn’t see this as the central focus of formal theology. Rather, he tended to leave application in the hands of ministers and pastors, limiting the actual work of formal theology largely to academics and scholars. 
In addition to describing theology as a science, Hodge also claimed that there were two main topics in theology: first, the “nature of God” and second, “our relation to him.” This twofold division of theology is similar to Aquinas’ distinction between theology proper and general theology.
Having seen the typical definitions of theology in Aquinas and Hodge, it will be helpful to look at a third viewpoint. William Ames, an influential Puritan who lived from 1576 to 1633, characterized the task of theology in a strikingly different way. 

