#### William Ames 

In the opening section of his book, The Marrow of Theology, Ames wrote that theology should focus on: 

**the doctrine or teaching of living to God**

Now, it’s clear from Ames’ writings that his views reflected traditional outlooks on theology. As he put it here, theology is “doctrine or teaching” — the intellectual pursuit of ideas. But it’s important to note that he did not refer to theology as a “science.” Rather, he de-emphasized the close association of theology with other academic disciplines suggested by the language in Aquinas and Hodge. Instead, he identified the marrow of theology — theology’s most central focus — as “living to God.” 
Aquinas, and to some extent Hodge, focused on theology as a collection of facts and ideas. But for Ames, the goal of all theological endeavors involved how to live in service to God. Instead of limiting theology primarily to an intellectual, factual pursuit, Ames looked with an experiential — or what the Puritans called “experimental” — orientation toward theology. In Ames view, the most significant dimension of theology is a focus on the full range of the believer’s life before God. 
With the views of Aquinas, Hodge and Ames in mind, let’s consider a fourth typical definition offered by the contemporary theologian John Frame. 


#### John Frame

In chapter 3 of his book, The Doctrine of the Knowledge of God, Frame defined theology as:

**the application of the Word of God by persons to all areas of life**

Now, elsewhere Frame affirmed that theology involves the intellectual pursuit of Christian teaching or doctrine. But here Frame stressed that theology is the “application” of God’s Word to “all areas of life.” 
For Frame, theology is not merely thinking about a set of traditional, relatively academic issues. Instead, like Ames, Frame sees theology as application. Applying the Scriptures to life is the centerpiece of all Christian theological work.

> Theology really can go a couple of different directions. It can go in the path of academic pursuit, and that can be a legitimate and important thing. It can go in the direction of application to life. Part of what’s interesting is people tend to choose between those and pit them against one another. Within the church there is rightly an emphasis on application to life, so we want to know not just information, we want to know how it applies to your life. That’s good and legitimate and ultimately the right end of this theology — how we enjoy God, how we worship him, how we obey him in this world. When we emphasize that, we can say, “Why would academic theology have any importance to us?” But actually, it can have importance because it can help keep us honest. The reality is, we can take the Scriptures and try and apply them and say, “Here’s theology, and here’s how it applies to your life.” But what if we have the theology wrong? What if we’re saying things that historically, biblically, linguistically are just not true? So, the academic is a fancy way of just saying, it’s a legitimate discipline to do theology. Another way sometimes as theologians we talk about it is, good theology is public theology. It’s open for critique. It’s open for feedback because we want to make sure we’re not worshiping an idol but the living God, that that, then, for that good theology, can shape our lives. So, it’s got to be about application, but it’s appropriate for us to be rigorous and careful in our reflections.
> 
> — Dr. Kelly M. Kapic

As we’ve just seen, these typical definitions of theology have similarities. But they also reflect two distinct emphases or tendencies in the field of formal theology.


### TENDENCIES

To unpack these tendencies, we’ll consider first what we may call the academic orientation in theology. Then we’ll look at the life orientation that some theologians have taken toward their discipline. Let’s start with an academic orientation.



#### Academic Orientation

On the one side, Aquinas and Hodge represent an academic orientation in theology. Their outlooks reflect the majority of Christian theologians’ views. In simple terms, they define theology in ways that correspond to the etymology, or linguistic background, of the word itself. “Theology” derives from two Greek words: theos (θεός), meaning “God,” and logos (λόγος), meaning “doctrine or study.” So, the etymology of the word suggests that theology is “the doctrine or study of God.” This academic understanding of theology characterizes the vast majority of formal theological works, both in the past and today. 
Of course, there’s hardly a sincere Christian theologian who would say that merely studying about God and other topics in relation to God should be an end in itself. Faithful Christians affirm that theology is supposed to be applied to their lives in one way or another. But in this dominant, traditional outlook, application to the daily lives of believers is not seen as primary. Rather, it’s a secondary enterprise — often called “practical theology” — that we do after we’ve settled scholarly, academic issues in formal theology. As a result, formal theology often can be performed with very little concern for ordinary living. It remains an area in which only a few academically-gifted people can involve themselves to any significant degree. And a sort of culture of intellectual expertise develops in theology.
Now on the other side, rather than a tendency toward an academic orientation in theology, some theologians approach theology with a life orientation.


#### Life Orientation

Ames and Frame represent this important minority view in which applying theology to the practicalities of life isn’t a secondary task. Rather, it’s the essence of theological reflection in the Christian faith. 
Of course, throughout the centuries, there have been theologians who have seen theology as inextricably tied to the broader range of living as a believer. But in the past, relatively few leading theologians held this view. In recent decades, however, more and more Christian theologians have begun to reject the concept that theology should be concerned simply with intellectual matters. They’ve argued against formal theology as just an academic or conceptual basis for Christian living, but rather as a discipline that is deeply and essentially concerned with living for Christ.
As theologians have carefully reflected on the Scriptures, they’ve come to realize more clearly that love, devotion and service to Christ entail every aspect of our lives, not simply how we think about things. This biblical teaching has become increasingly significant in recent decades because scholars in nearly every field of study have begun to acknowledge how much life experiences influence their academic fields. Even the most gifted scholars in the world cannot escape the influence of their cultures and life experiences. And the same is true when it comes to formal theology. We’re constantly reminded these days of the humanity of intellectuals and how their personal lives can deeply influence their academic pursuits. 
For example, scientists and medical professionals, who were once thought to be purely objective, are now seen as ordinary people. We regularly question their opinions in ways that would have been unimaginable just a few decades ago. And, in much the same way, the church now recognizes more clearly that no matter how brilliant theologians may be, they are still mere humans. As much as they may claim to be objective observers of the facts, their views are deeply affected by their life experiences. As a result, purely academic approaches to theology are valued much less today, and the need for application is seen much more clearly than before. 
So far, we’ve touched on four typical definitions of theology and two important tendencies that they represent. Now, we should step back and offer some evaluations of these tendencies. 
