### EVALUATIONS

Many of us have heard the adage, “Our greatest strength can also be our greatest weakness.” And we all know what this means. Our beliefs, our attitudes and our actions can be of great value to us, but if we aren’t careful, they can also hurt us. In many ways, both academic and life orientations in theology offer many benefits, but they also have the potential for harm. For this reason, we should take a few moments to evaluate both of these theological orientations.
 As we make our evaluations, we’ll be looking at the advantages and disadvantages of both an academic orientation and a life orientation in the formal discipline of theology. Let’s start with an academic orientation.


#### Academic Orientation

Perhaps the greatest advantage or strength of academic approaches to theology is that they emphasize one of God’s most wondrous gifts to humanity: our rational abilities. God has granted human beings intellectual capacities, and he expects theologians to exercise those abilities as they pursue theological truths. 
Throughout Scripture, wise men are honored for using their intellectual abilities in service to God. The Bible shows us that to be wise is to ponder what is true and to formulate sets of coherent beliefs out of those rational enquiries. For instance, Solomon was considered wise because he exercised his ability to think through matters. Listen to the high praise given to Solomon in 1 Kings 4:29-31:

> God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding beyond measure, and breadth of mind like the sand on the seashore … For he was wiser than all other men … and his fame was in all the surrounding nations (1 Kings 4:29-31). 

Similarly, the wisdom literature of the Bible repeatedly calls on faithful believers to develop and use their reasoning abilities.

> God has generally and graciously revealed himself to us in so many ways, so we can actually understand God and who he is and what he wants from us, maybe through what people preach to us and through reading the Scriptures as well. So that is there… That doesn’t mean that we don’t need to use our intellectual faculties to understand the Christian faith. Now, if you look at Paul, when he met the philosophers in Acts 17, he actually used his intellectual capabilities to be able to convince them about what he believes, and through that he was able to win some people over to the Lord. And I think we also need to actually use our intellectual faculties to understand the Christian faith, first, so that we can understand God and what he has revealed about himself, so that we can have a meaningful relationship with him. And number two, so that when anybody asks us about our faith, we’ll be in a good position, whether a philosopher or whoever that person may be, we’ll be in a good position to explain our Christian faith to that person like Paul did. So, I think it is very, very important for us to use our intellectual faculties, or the gift that God has given us to reason, to be able to understand our Christian faith. 
> 
> — Rev. Dr. Humphrey Akogyeram


> Learning theology formally and systematically is so important for both the church and the believers to grow, through understanding Scripture and the Christian doctrines. The church usually doesn’t cover these subjects, and we need to train people who can study the Word of God and teach it to others in order to create a generation capable of bearing the message and the depth of teaching God’s Word to others, through their training, evangelism, relationship with the church, and especially, the relationship between the church and the society.
> 
> — Rev. Azar Ajaj, translation

Peter acknowledged the importance of intellectual sophistication in 2 Peter 3:15 16 when he commented on the theology of the apostle Paul. He noted: 

> Our beloved brother Paul also wrote to you according to the wisdom given him … There are some things in [his letters] that are hard to understand (2 Peter 3:15-16). 

As we can see, the intellectual or academic emphasis of traditional theology doesn’t oppose the biblical notion of good theology. On the contrary, rigorous thinking is a great strength of traditional theology.
Still, as valuable as academic orientations toward theology may be, we must always be alert to the dangers they pose. All too often, theologians gather, analyze and collate facts about God with remarkable skill, but they fail to give the same careful attention to living in service to God. Sophisticated, rational theological analysis often becomes an end in itself. We commonly consider people to be “good theologians” simply because they know a lot about theological subjects. But at times we have to admit that good theologians are not always good people. 
How do we get to the point where someone can be a good theologian but not be a good person? It’s when we operate with a definition of theology that merely includes academic activities, when we think that doing theology means studying well, writing well, and teaching true ideas. 

> It’s quite possible to be a good theologian, or called a good theologian, and not be a good person. In fact, it happens all too often that people write really great books, they preach great sermons, they’re leaders of the church, and then we find out that they really weren’t good people all along. It happens far too much. And it does happen because often we identify a good theologian with somebody who’s smart and who can be rigorous in their thinking, and we don’t consider whether that thinking is impacting their lives. And it’s a very serious problem… They can be good in their task, in their art, but they can be very bad people in the ways that they live. Now, the problem is that often we’re willing to accept that. We’re willing to just sort of let it be that way and never really challenge our best intellectual theologians to turn their great thoughts into real life. And that’s where it becomes a problem, when it’s in the church of Jesus Christ and among our leaders, because the truth is, we don’t just need good academic theologians. We need good academic theologians who are also good people, people who are conforming their lives to the ways of Christ.
> 
> — Dr. Richard L. Pratt, Jr.
 

> Theology is not just simply head knowledge. Theology is a knowledge that actually informs both our hearts and our lives. And so, if someone has knowledge, if they have biblical or theological knowledge, and yet it’s not impacting their life — that is, the way they treat people; that is, the way that they live; that is, the way that they serve God in their life — then they don’t have good theology. I would actually argue that is not theology, because the goal of theology is to apply Scriptures into our life. And so, I would say, in the end, that someone whom we might regard as a good theologian but rather not a good person is not in the end a good theologian. 
> 
> — Rev. Hutch Garmany

As important as it is to evaluate the pros and cons of academic orientations in Christian theology, we should also be aware of the advantages and disadvantages of life orientations. How should we assess the growing consensus that theology must be connected more directly with life?


#### Life Orientation

In many respects, the greatest strength of a life orientation in theology is that it enables us to fulfill important biblical values. We all know that passages like James 1:22 call for us to go beyond mere academic theological pursuits. As James put it:

> Be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving yourselves (James 1:22). 

The intellectual hypocrisy of many theologians is utterly discounted by James’ words. Good theology will lead to proper living and not just proper learning. If we believe anything different, we’re only deceiving ourselves. Isn’t this what Paul indicated in 1 Corinthians 8:1 where he warned: 

> “Knowledge” puffs up, but love builds up (1 Corinthians 8:1). 

And in 1 Corinthians 13:2, the apostle went so far as to say: 

> If I … understand all mysteries and all knowledge … but have not love, I am nothing (1 Corinthians 13:2). 

The apostle Paul insisted that even if we’re able to grasp every imaginable theological concept, if those concepts don’t yield the fruit of love then our theological efforts amount to nothing. 
The Scriptures constantly call faithful followers of Christ to orient their theological reflections toward living for God. We really aren’t fulfilling biblical standards if we only concentrate on learning about theology in some objective, conceptual way. Rather, theology that endorses the values of Scripture will be theology that fleshes out what we believe.
At the same time, however, life orientations toward theology also pose a serious danger, especially the risk of what we may call “anti-intellectualism.” All too often, Christians who value living for Christ reject the value of careful, rigorous theological analysis. Some actually view traditional, academic-oriented formal theology as harmful to Christian living. 
We’ve all heard sincere people say things like, “I don’t think we should get into doctrine. That will only take our minds off of Christ.” Or, maybe you’ve heard, “You don’t need to study theology; just be filled with the Spirit.” Or perhaps, “Intellectual Christianity is dead Christianity.” These well-meaning believers reject traditional, academically-oriented theology for an anti-intellectual approach to the faith. Instead of building their lives on carefully, even rigorously-conceived theology, believers like these often simply lean on their spiritual intuitions without carefully examining them. Now, it’s true that we should live for Christ and be filled with the Spirit. It’s also true that intellectually-oriented Christianity can be deadly. But at the same time, all of us should resist the serious danger of anti-intellectualism in the church. This anti-intellectualism will inevitably lead to false teachings and misconceptions of the Christian faith that will have dreadful ramifications for the lives of many believers. 
Paul acknowledged this danger in 2 Timothy 2:15 where he encouraged Timothy in this way: 

> Do your best to present yourself to God as one approved, a worker who has no need to be ashamed, rightly handling the word of truth (2 Timothy 2:15). 

Here Paul insisted that Timothy must handle the word of truth rightly. But to do this was not an easy task. Handling the word of truth properly required Timothy to become a “worker” — ergates (ἐργάτης) in Greek — a term for someone who works diligently. Building Christian theology requires rigorous intellectual reflection. 
Each of us must look carefully at the way we define theology. Some of us naturally tend toward an academically-oriented view of theology to the neglect of other aspects of life. Others of us tend toward a life orientation to the neglect of intellectual matters. To avoid these extremes, we must acknowledge that there are strengths and dangers in both views. The way of wisdom is to embrace both outlooks at the same time. We need both academic theology and theology for life.
Having explored several facets of the definitions of theology, we’re ready to look at a second issue: the goals of theology. What purposes should move to the foreground as Christians build their theology? And how are these aims interconnected? 
