### INTERDEPENDENCE

We’ll look at this interdependence in three ways. First, we’ll see some of the ways orthodoxy impacts the other two goals of theology. Then we’ll note how orthopraxis affects both orthodoxy and orthopathos. And third, we’ll consider how orthopathos influences the goals of orthopraxis and orthodoxy. Let’s look first at the ways orthodoxy, or right thinking, impacts our behaviors and emotions. 


#### Orthodoxy

Most evangelicals today rightly believe that some measure of orthodoxy is necessary for orthopraxis and orthopathos to occur. We learn from many academic and popular theologians that we must first understand the truth, and then apply it to our lives. It’s quite common for Christians to operate with a rather straightforward perspective on these matters: “What I believe will determine how I live.” And this is certainly true. What we believe to be true deeply influences our behaviors and our emotions. 
At times, as our orthodoxy develops, what we come to believe will confirm our behaviors and emotions. Perhaps you’re a person who’s naturally inclined to feel sympathy for others and to act on those feelings. As you study theological concepts like humanity as the image of God and the kindness and mercy of God himself, you’ll find that the deepening of your orthodoxy will confirm and enhance your behaviors and emotions.
At the same time, however, orthodox theological concepts often challenge us to change our behaviors and feelings. Perhaps you’re a person who struggles with selfishness and greed. You’re indifferent to the poor, and you do nothing to help relieve their suffering. Then, as your theological concepts of humanity and God become more orthodox, you will find it necessary to change your behaviors and emotions. Pursuing orthodoxy impacts orthopraxis and orthopathos in these and countless other ways.

> Orthodox beliefs — that is, right beliefs — impact and should impact our emotions and our actions and our life because what we believe should be expressed in our lives. And we are called not to live to be transformed in our minds but also in our emotions. And what we believe should inform our lives. The information that we have through our beliefs, by the grace of God and the work of the Holy Spirit, should transform us and eventually to form us so that our affections are really according to the will of God and our actions are also according to his revealed in the Word of God. And that is possible only by the enabling grace of the Holy Spirit. 
> 
> — Dr. David Samuel

Now let’s turn to a second way the goals of theology are interdependent. How does orthopraxis influence orthodoxy and orthopathos? How do our behaviors affect our beliefs and our emotions? 


#### Orthopraxis

In the first place, orthopraxis often confirms or challenges what we believe to be true. For instance, consider what happens when inexperienced students of theology are asked, “Why should Christians pray?” 
All too often, when believers don’t have much experience of God answering their prayers, they respond to this question with something like, “We should pray because God commanded it.” Now, this answer is true, as far as it goes. But I’ve never heard a prayer warrior — someone who is known for having an extensive, fully developed prayer life — answer in this way. It’s true that the Bible teaches us to pray because we’re commanded to, but a lack of prayer experience often hinders us from seeing many other biblical motivations for prayer. So, our practice of prayer influences what we understand to be true about prayer. 
When believers are more experienced in prayer, they’re often able to see more clearly all kinds of reasons the Bible gives us to pray. We pray because God is worthy of our prayers. We pray because we need him. We pray because, well, as James said in James 5:16:

> The prayer of a righteous person has great power as it is working (James 5:16).

Righteous behavior and the experience of prayer yield the true insight that prayer is not only commanded; it’s also powerful and effective. A lack of godly behavior robs us of these theological beliefs. But the experience of holy living challenges, confirms, and enhances our beliefs in many ways. 
Beyond this, our actions also influence the emotional dimensions of our theology. That is to say, orthopraxis impacts orthopathos. For example, when believers commit serious sins, they often go through the emotional experience of guilt and conviction. At the same time, when we do what is right, we often find the joy and pleasure of God’s approval and blessing. We all know from common experience that feelings of shame and sadness, confidence and calm, joy and excitement often result from our behaviors.

> Recently there was a crisis in an institution in which I serve as the president of the board. There were some people coming from outside with some vested interest, especially from other religions, trying to create trouble in the institution. So, there was an option that we really compromise with them, but we stood firm and decided that we will do the right thing and will not make compromises for the sake of false peace. And God honored our stand for him, and we were delivered from all those enemies, and it has really led to great joy energizing the community.
> 
> — Dr. David Samuel 

As we’ve seen, orthodoxy — holding to true theological concepts — affects what we do and feel. And orthopraxis — behaving as truth requires — affects what we feel and believe. Now let’s take one more look at the interdependence of the goals. How does our orthopathos — our right emotions and attitudes — influence what we believe and do?


#### Orthopathos

> I think everybody understands from daily experience that the way we think about things impacts our emotions. And we also understand that when we do certain things, that also has an emotional impact. But sometimes we don’t consider just how much emotions feed back into the ways we think and the ways we behave. And when you do Christian theology, it’s very important to keep that direction of influence in mind also. I mean, think about it this way, when you’re discouraged, you’re just not motivated much to delve into complicated ideas. So, your emotions are impacting the way you think about things. Or we could put it this way, your orthopathos, your pathos, is impacting your orthodoxy. But on the other side, if you’re optimistic in a situation, then you’re ready to tackle all kinds of intellectual problems and issues and ideas, and so once again your emotions are impacting the way you think. This is so very important, and every teacher know this, that one of the critical things in teaching is the motivation or the emotions of the student and how that impacts the way they think, even the way they learn about things. And this is true all through Christian theology. And at the same time, emotions also impact our actions. When we’re bewildered, it’s hard to do the right thing. It’s just that simple. And it’s true for Christians when they do Christian theology that when they start drawing out the implications of the Bible for their orthopraxis, the ways they live, the ways they behave, if they’re tired and bewildered and discouraged, they’re just not going to have the energy for doing the right thing. But the flip side of that is that if you’re encouraged, something’s happened that’s made you feel good and strong, then you find that you’ll do what you ought to do more readily. I just think that’s very important to us because even in the Bible, when the Lord calls his people to obey him, he often gives them motivations for why they should obey him. He calls them to rejoice and to reflect on the good things that have happened, or the bad things that have happened. And that emotional impact then leads them into obedience to God. So, as important as it is to realize that our emotions are affected by the ways we think and the ways we act, it’s also just as important to realize that our emotions impact how we think and how we behave. So, all of these are critical to the process of studying Christian theology. 
> 
> — Dr. Richard L. Pratt, Jr. 

We find some of the best examples of orthopathos in the Psalms. Time and again, the psalmists’ emotions moved their thinking and actions in one way or another. For instance, when a psalmist felt forsaken, his expressions of orthodox thinking focused primarily on the trials he underwent and how his faith in God factored into this suffering. Listen to Psalm 13:1-3 and the way the psalmist’s sorrow pressed him to ask perplexing theological questions. He pleaded: 

> How long, O Lord? Will you forget me forever? How long will you hide your face from me? … Consider and answer me, O Lord my God (Psalm 13:1-3). 

In much the same way, the psalmists’ emotions also influenced their actions. When forlorn, the psalmists were not quietly passive. Instead, they wept profusely; they grew sick. As the psalmist put it in Psalm 6:6:

> I am weary with my moaning; every night I flood my bed with tears; I drench my couch with my weeping (Psalm 6:6). 

At the same time, when the psalmists were joyful, they displayed this feeling with the behaviors of dance and praise. As we read in Psalm 30:11:

> You have turned for me my mourning into dancing; have loosed my sackcloth and clothed me with gladness (Psalm 30:11).


> Good theology will be concerned not only with the intellectual or the outward working of the Christian faith in our actions, but what is sometimes called orthopathos, in other words, our emotional reaction to the truth of God’s Word. And I think that it’s important that the truth shouldn’t just remain at the cognitive and intellectual level because it impacts who we are as human beings. And anything that we truly love or believe in incites in us emotions and affections and feelings, and that sort of “pathos” side of our humanity is part of the true outworking of the Spirit of God when we’ve grasped the truth of God. 
> 
> — Dr. Simon Vibert

All of this is to say that the three goals of orthodoxy, orthopraxis and orthopathos do not operate apart from each other. They are highly interdependent. As we build our theology, we must always keep in mind that what we believe impacts our actions and attitudes. Our practices influence our beliefs and emotions. And our emotions affect our beliefs and actions as well. 
Understanding the interdependence of the three primary goals of theology raises a critical issue. What priorities should we observe as we pursue the goals of theology? Should we concentrate more on orthodoxy, orthopraxis or orthopathos? 
