# Study Guide 
# Old Testament Foundations
# Module One – Introduction to the Pentateuch

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for this course’s final exam.

**********************************

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 – 31:24

Introduction	

I. Modern Critical Approaches

      A. Presuppositions	 

  	1. Naturalism

  	2. Historical Development	

      B. Authorship

  	1. Divine Names

  	2. Duplicate Accounts

 	3. Inconsistencies	

      C. Interpretive Strategies	

 	1. Source Criticism	

  	2. Form Criticism

  	3. Tradition Criticism
 
  	4. Redaction Criticism

  	5. Contemporary Criticism	


## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. What has been the attitude of many, if not all, modern critical scholars regarding the authority and inspiration of the Pentateuch? 

2.  What are the key presuppositions of modern critical scholars? What currents of thought influenced them?

3. What is naturalism? How did it affect the attitude of critical scholars toward the Pentateuch?

4. What is naturalistic historicism? How did it affect the attitude of critical scholars toward the Old Testament?

5. What has been the view of modern critical scholars regarding the human authorship and composition of the Pentateuch?

6. What evidence do the modern critical scholars give to defend their view of the authorship and composition of the Pentateuch?

7. Name the five interpretive strategies regarding the composition of the Pentateuch, and give a brief explanation of each one.

8. Explain the view of K H Graf and Julius Wellhausen regarding the composition of the Pentateuch.

