## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 31:24 – 1:13:43

II. Modern Evangelical Approaches	

      A. Presuppositions	

  	1. Supernaturalism

  	2. Historical Development	

      B. Authorship

  	1. Biblical Evidence

  	2. Essential Mosaic Authorship

      C. Interpretive Strategies	

  	1. Thematic

  	2. Historical

  	3. Literary	

Conclusion 

## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. How does the lesson define "evangelicals"?

2.  What are the key presuppositions of evangelicals?

3. Explain the evangelical position regarding the authorship of the Pentateuch.

4.  Mention the biblical evidence that Moses is the essential author of the Pentateuch.

5. Explain the evangelical view of the composition of the Pentateuch, including the use of other sources and the use of secretaries.

6. What is an "amanuense?"

7. What term is used for the language in which Moses probably wrote the Pentateuch? Explain the stages of development of this language until it became the form in which we have the Old Testament now.

8. What argument is presented in the lesson to show that we can still trust the Pentateuch to represent what Moses himself wrote, even though it may have gone through a process of updating after Moses?

9. Name the languages that Moses probably knew.

10. Name the evangelical interpretive strategies for studying the Pentateuch. Give a brief description of each. 

11. Which interpretive strategy will be the emphasis of the lessons of this course?
