	
# Theological Foundations – Module Six - Salvation
## Discussion Questions 

1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	How did man’s fall into sin corrupt not only our souls but also our physical bodies?


3.	Discuss how the gospel, or “good news,” ensures our resurrection.


4.	Discuss when everlasting life begins.


5.	Explain how everlasting life for believers is not simply a matter of having our existence and consciousness continue forever.


6.	In what ways does the law reflect the character of God?


7.	All three members of the Trinity work together to bring about our salvation. What does this mean for the way that God loved us in our sin and continues to love us after we are saved?


8.	How do Christians continually need to have brokenness and faith in their Christian lives?


9.	How does the merit of Christ become the ground of our salvation, and how can faith in him give us confidence in his forgiveness?


10.	In what ways has prayer been a means of grace in your life?


11.	How do we continue to need the gospel as believers?


12.	How can everlasting life be experienced now?
 
REVIEW STATEMENT on SALVATION – EVERLASTING LIFE: All God's people will ultimately be rewarded with perfect, blessed, incorruptible, never-ending life in the blessing of God — knowing him and being with him. We will probably interact with the new cosmos and have interesting and significant things to do. Even now believers possess the down payment of that eternal life. But what God has in store for us is so wonderful that we probably can't understand it fully now. God is keeping it a secret for now. I'm sure he loves to surprise us and is preparing great surprises.

CASE STUDY: Antonio died at the age of 96. Before he died, family and close friends met with him and asked him to talk about things he had learned about God, about himself, and about life. One of the things he said was this, "When I was young, I suppose I wanted to go to be with the Lord — mostly in a sort of theoretical way. That is, I believed God's promise of a new heavens and a new earth and a new body. But in practice there were so many things I wanted to do here on earth that I hoped Christ wouldn't come back too quickly. As I've grown in the Lord, he has gradually changed my perspective. Now I can truly say that, for many years now, I really long to experience what God has for his people in the time of life everlasting. It's increasingly much more real and more important to me now that it was when I was young.
## Reflection Questions
1.	Do you look forward to eternal life or not? Elaborate.
2.	Do you think the people in your church look forward to eternal life, or are they too taken up with living the present? Elaborate.
3.	Does the hope of the future affect your daily life?
4.	How does the hope of the future affect your ministry?
## Action Assignments
•	Take some time to focus the activities of the coming week in light of the great hope you have of eternal life with God.
•	Memorize John 5:24.


