## FINDING REVELATION

Theologians have often spoken of God as the “hidden God,” or in theological terms, the “Deus Absconditus.” And God would be entirely hidden from us if it were not for the fact that he’s revealed himself. All genuine believers should acknowledge our need for divine revelation. After all, Old Testament prophets, Jesus and New Testament authors spoke with one voice on this issue. And faithful Christians throughout church history have done the same. We simply can’t build reliable theology on human speculation. We must build on the solid foundation of divine revelation. But all of this raises a crucial question. Where do we find God’s revelation? 
As we explore the subject of finding revelation, we’ll touch on three issues. First, we’ll look at the doctrine of general revelation. Second, we’ll consider the doctrine of special revelation. And third, we’ll examine the interconnections between these two forms of revelation. Let’s begin with general revelation.


### GENERAL REVELATION

One of the principal ways God has revealed himself to humanity is what we often call “general revelation.” We use the term “general” to indicate that God reveals himself through all created things in general and to all people in general. It’s sometimes also called “natural revelation” because this revelation comes through the medium of nature or creation. 
A number of biblical passages teach us about general revelation. For instance, we find the concept mentioned in Psalm 19:1-6; Acts 14:15-17; and Acts 17:26, 27. But perhaps the fullest description of general revelation in the Bible appears in the familiar verses of Romans 1:18-32. 

> General revelation is what God reveals to us about himself or tells us about himself through creation and through providence, that is to say, through nature and also through the course of history. It’s revelatory; it tells us about God as we see in, for example, Psalm 19: “The heavens declare the glory of God.” So, contemplating the heavens, the heavenly bodies, the earth, the sun, the moon, the stars and so on, we can contemplate that there is a Creator who is glorious. And in Romans 1, also, Paul talks about that we can know about God, about his power and his wisdom through what we perceive in creation. 
> 
> — Dr. Larry Trotter

To look into this biblical teaching on general revelation, we should touch on two matters: the medium — instrument or conduit of general revelation — and the content of general revelation. In the first place, the Scriptures teach that the medium of general revelation is all of creation. 


#### Medium

Listen to the way Paul put the matter in Romans 1:18-20: 

> For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven … God has shown it to [human beings] … in the things that have been made (Romans 1:18-20).

These words tell us that God reveals himself to us through the creation, or as it says here, “in the things that have been made.” 
Revelation comes through massive galaxies in space and through microscopic units of matter. The physical, the abstract, and the spiritual dimensions of creation — even our own existence as human beings — everything in creation mediates God’s revelation. Unfortunately, Christians often assume that the words in Romans 1 only refer to creation in its natural state. We all know how forests, lakes, mountains, and wilderness can turn our thoughts to God. But we often fail to realize that civilization, technology, and human culture as a whole also reveal God. 

> In Scripture, God tells us, and Paul gives us argument in Romans 1, that it doesn’t matter who it is or of what culture, every human being who has ever existed has known about the existence of God… Paul said that every man knows that God exists by conscience. Man has a reason, he has a conscience, and through what has been created in the world, God’s divine nature has been clearly seen. So, all men know that God exists by creation and conscience. And if you look in Romans 1, it also says that God’s righteous nature and his holiness is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness of men, and it is seen in that men denied that. They suppressed the truth of God in their unrighteousness. 
> 
> — Rev. Clete Hux 

As we read in Romans 1:32: 

> Though they know God’s righteous decree that those who practice such [perversions] deserve to die, they not only do them but give approval to those who practice them (Romans 1:32).

These words indicate that general revelation comes through what people do with nature, not just through creation in its natural state. Human technologies, science, architecture, politics, family life, art, medicine, music, and the countless products of human culture also facilitate God’s revelation. We simply cannot escape the revelation of God. 
In addition to the medium of general revelation, we should note that in Romans 1 Paul also indicated the basic content of general revelation. 


#### Content

Now, from one perspective, Paul was not very precise about what people know through general revelation. His lack of specificity probably results from the fact that different people in different places and times encounter and acknowledge different aspects of general revelation. Nevertheless, Paul made it clear that general revelation reveals at least two kinds of information to human beings: God’s attributes and our corresponding moral responsibilities.
On the one hand, as Paul put it in Romans 1:20, creation reveals: 

> [God’s] invisible attributes, namely, his eternal power and divine nature (Romans 1:20).

Here, Paul made it clear that the attributes of God that cannot be viewed directly are seen indirectly in his creation. Every person, no matter who they are, knows some dimension of God’s character because, as we read earlier in Romans 1:19, “God has shown it to them” in general revelation. For example, the beauty of creation points to God’s astounding beauty. Nature’s provision for human life demonstrates God’s goodness. The mere size of creation reveals his enormity. The complexity of creation shows his unmatched wisdom. And the power of nature reveals his divine power. 

> If we look at the human body, it’s part of general revelation. God gave us a very complex body. It’s exquisite and marvelous. For instance, scientists estimate the number of cells in the human body to be thirty-seven trillion. Thirty-seven trillion! And each cell is complex and has a certain structure and function… If we think about space around us, we see marvelous things. We have the solar system, and planet earth is just one of the planets that revolves around the sun, and we call this the solar system… We are just one solar system within countless solar systems in our galaxy. What is more astonishing than all of this is that scientists estimate that there are hundreds of billions of galaxies! So, the question is: Why all of this? Who made all of this? Is it reasonable that all of this came about by itself? Or is it that a wise and great God, who is full of majesty and power, with no beginning or end, created these things? 
> 
> — Rev. Dr. Emad A. Mikhail, translation

On the other hand, in addition to displaying God’s invisible attributes, general revelation communicates aspects of our moral responsibilities before God. Listen again to Romans 1:32 where Paul spoke of the sinfulness of the human race: 

> Though they know God’s righteous decree that those who practice such [perversions] deserve to die, they not only do them but give approval to those who practice them (Romans 1:32).

In other words, various aspects of creation reveal moral responsibilities that we bear before God. For instance, the biological distinctions between male and female reveal our obligation to practice heterosexuality. Children’s dependence on parental care reveals both parents’ obligation to care for their children and children’s responsibility to honor their parents. The suffering of human beings in famine and war reveals our obligation to show mercy. Everywhere we look, the creation calls out to us, demanding that we conform our lives to the moral standards God exhibits in and through the creation.
Now that we’ve examined finding revelation by touching on the doctrine of general revelation, we should turn to the doctrine of special revelation.
