### SPECIAL REVELATION

In traditional Christian theology, it’s common to distinguish between general revelation — how God has revealed himself to all people through all things — and special revelation. This distinction is helpful in many ways, but we have to be careful. When evangelical Protestants speak of special revelation, they often think exclusively of the Scriptures. To be sure, the Bible is a crucial dimension of God’s special revelation, but special revelation includes much more than the Bible. 
 Special revelation has been called “special” largely because it’s not given to all people in all places, but it’s given to specific or special segments of humanity. This type of revelation has taken many forms throughout history, but from the Christian point of view, God revealed himself most clearly and fully in his Son Jesus. Hebrews 1:1-3 offers a succinct summary of the Christian outlook on special revelation:

> Long ago, at many times and in many ways, God spoke to our fathers by the prophets, but in these last days he has spoken to us by his Son, whom he appointed the heir of all things, through whom also he created the world. He is the radiance of the glory of God and the exact imprint of his nature (Hebrews 1:1-3).

Prior to the coming of Christ, God revealed himself and his will in many special ways. He spoke directly to people, gave them supernatural dreams, opened their eyes to visions, and spoke through prophets, priests, kings, and sages. But none of these revelations compares to the fullness and supremely glorious revelation in Christ, the Son of God. Jesus’ life and teachings are the premier special revelation of God. And for this reason, it’s quite appropriate to say that the standard for Christian theology is God’s revelation in Christ. Now, this commitment to Christ as God’s supreme revelation leads to a number of important implications. But for our purposes, one of the most important and practical implications is that we should also be committed to Scripture as God’s revelation.

> When we think of why we should submit to the Old and New Testaments as God’s revelation, we can think of how Jesus Christ treated the Scriptures. When Jesus read Scripture, where did his authority come from? He claimed that he was from the Father, but a lot of times when he referred to the Father’s authority, his words were based on the Old Testament. That means, the Bible that Jesus read was the entirety of the Old Testament; the Old Testament was his canon. Then, he also told us that he gave us apostles and prophets. As Ephesians 2, 4 repeatedly emphasize, Jesus Christ is the cornerstone, with the apostles and prophets as the foundation of the church. To us, the Old and New Testaments together are the revelation that we have received. 
> 
> — Dr. Biao Chen, translation

Those who look to Christ as the supreme revelation of God must follow his example and submit to his teaching by receiving the Old and New Testaments as God’s special revelation for his people today. 

> It is vital for us to love the Scripture as having come from the mind, from the heart of God. God is our heavenly Father in Christ, and he’s speaking to us. And when Scripture speaks to us, we need to love what he’s saying. And probably, there’s no part of Scripture that displays this love for Scripture as much as Psalm 119. The psalmist over and over says, “Oh how I love your law and meditate on it day and night. I eat your words; I ponder them; they are my food.” And he just delights, verse after verse — 176 verses of delighting in the law of God. And I think to myself, how much more should I, as a New Testament believer, delight in the whole counsel of God? We have “better promises,” the book of Hebrews tells us. We have the fulfillment of the life of Christ, and so I can love whatever the writer of Psalm 119 loved, plus a whole lot more. 
> 
> — Dr. Andrew Davis

We’ve seen that, in our day, finding God’s revelation involves both general revelation in creation and special revelation in Scripture. Now, let’s turn our attention to the interconnections between these doctrines. Understanding these interconnections will help us see that we can’t neglect either form of revelation. 


### INTERCONNECTIONS

The last thing we want to do as we build Christian theology is to ignore anything that God has revealed in either general or special revelation. Jesus pointed to the importance of general revelation in his parables and also every time he drew from common life experiences in his teaching. He also pointed to the importance of special revelation every time he referred to the Scriptures. But for you and me to rely on both of these forms of revelation as Jesus did, we must come to grips with how they are deeply interconnected. Special revelation of the Scriptures guides us as we reflect on general revelation. And general revelation helps us as we seek to grasp God’s special revelation in the Scriptures. At every step along the way, the two go hand in hand. 
We’ll touch on two aspects of the interconnections between these types of revelation: the overlap between general and special revelation and the need for both forms of revelation. Let’s look first at the overlap between general and special revelation.


#### Overlap

Although we often speak of general and special revelation under separate headings, we need to recognize that these two forms of revelation overlap significantly. To see this, we must acknowledge the variety of content found in both forms of revelation. 
On the one side, special revelation in the Scriptures touches on many subjects that form a continuum between extraordinary insights and very common insights. Some portions of the Bible are so extraordinary that no one could have written them through normal observations or experiences, even with divine guidance. These portions of the Bible were given in extraordinary, supernatural ways. Perhaps the most obvious examples of this kind of material in the Bible are portions of books like Daniel, Joel and Revelation. The men who wrote these materials received their information through visions and other supernatural means given particularly to them. In this sense, we may call these portions of Scripture “very special revelation.”
Along this continuum, a sort of middle ground appears in Scripture where we find mixed elements of esoteric or extraordinary insights and insights granted by the Spirit through ordinary means. Take, for example, the biblical books of Kings and the Gospel of Luke. The writers of these books explicitly mentioned that they collected much of their data from ordinary human sources. Kings refers to the royal annals of Israel and Judah. Luke mentions that he gathered his material from eyewitnesses of Christ’s life. Special supernatural insights were certainly added as the Spirit of God guided these biblical writers. They had insights into the accuracy of the information they found in their sources, insights into how to interpret their sources, and insights into information not found through ordinary means. So, in this sense, these portions of the Bible mix the esoteric and the ordinary. 
Beyond this, large portions of Scripture consist of rather common but inspired insights. This is because the Holy Spirit often guided biblical authors to make correct observations about ordinary experiences. For example, in Proverbs 30:25 we read: 

> Ants are creatures of little strength, yet they store up their food in the summer (Proverbs 30:25, NIV). 

This statement is inspired and true, but it resulted from observing nature, not from receiving an esoteric vision. 
So, in this sense, special revelation contains materials that we often commonly associate with general revelation. These are the kinds of things that practically anyone can notice about the world. We may even say that these portions of the Bible are “generalized special revelation.”

> In Proverbs 14:20, it says, “Even a poor man is hated by his neighbors, but everyone loves the one who is rich.” That’s not making necessarily a positive or a negative evaluation, that’s just the skill of observation, of being able to understand what has happened there… It’s dealing with the kinds of things we run across all the time, whether it’s relationships, dealing with authority, thinking about our use of money, thinking about relationship to our parents, in thinking about our job, and even table manners, all kinds of really practical issues like that. And then, in a broader way … being able to understand life and the world correctly so that we can live skillfully. We know the kinds of pitfalls to avoid. We know the ways to get ahead in life. And it’s the Bible that begins to help us understand that if we really want to live life skillfully, we have to do that in terms of the fear of the Lord.
> 
> — Dr. Eric J. Tully

On the other side, just like special revelation, general revelation also includes a wide variety of content that can be characterized from common to extraordinary. On one end of this continuum, general revelation contains very common elements, things that are known to most, if not all, people who have ever lived. Nearly everyone knows that the world is immense, covered by a vast expanse of sky. And nearly everyone can remember times when they have experienced their moral conscience. These almost universal experiences have always revealed God and his will for humanity. We may speak of them as “very general revelation.”
Toward the center of the range of general revelation are mixed elements of common and extraordinary general revelation. These are experiences of creation that are given only to some people because they are limited in some way, such as by space or time. For instance, the winds of a terrible hurricane display the mighty power of God. But many people have never experienced a hurricane. The heights of the Himalayan Mountains reveal the glory of God, but most of the human race has not seen the Himalayas first-hand. Because we all face many limitations, not all general revelation goes to all people all the time. 
On the other end of the spectrum are rather extraordinary elements of general revelation. These involve times when people explicitly acknowledge, even without knowing the one, true God, some of the truths that God has revealed. The fact is that general revelation includes things we often associate more closely with special revelation. 
For instance, some non-Christian religions believe that there is only one God. Many religions distinguish between the ordinary and sacred in ways that parallel the true Christian faith. Murder is condemned in most religions. Basic social justice is extolled by many different faiths. In the ancient world of the Bible, other religions often closely resembled true biblical faith in some remarkable ways. And even today, missionaries report that some unreached peoples have beliefs similar to the Christian faith. In such cases, we may speak of “specialized general revelation.” 
So, as we reflect on the roles of special and general revelation in theology, we need to remember two things that are often forgotten. On the one hand, we need to remember that special revelation teaches us about things that are relatively common and can also be discerned through general revelation. This is why we look to the Scriptures as our authority, not only in purely religious and moral matters, but also as they touch on history and science. 
On the other hand, we also need to realize that general revelation has much to teach us about matters that we normally reserve for Scripture. In fact, as we’ll see in these lessons, many theological truths addressed by Scripture are also disclosed in general revelation. This is why we must look carefully at general revelation for divine guidance, even in matters that are highly religious.
As we’ve considered the interconnections between general and special revelation, we’ve seen the many ways they overlap. But now we should turn to our second concern. Why do we need both forms of revelation for theology? What does each one contribute? 
