#### Need 

On the one hand, we need special revelation because it exceeds general revelation in a number of ways. Special revelation is designed to specify, clarify, and reveal God and his will beyond what general revelation presents. 
For example, think of Adam and Eve. A number of theologians have observed in recent decades that God provided both special and general revelation to Adam and Eve while they were still in the state of innocence, before their fall into sin. Because Adam and Eve were without sin, we can be confident that they knew much about God and his will for them as they looked at creation. Yet, even before sin, theology was not to be derived by observing creation without the guidance of special revelation. God also gave his special word to Adam with specific instructions regarding the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, keeping the Garden, multiplying, moving beyond the borders of the Garden, and exercising dominion over the whole earth. 
Of course, once sin came into the world, special revelation also focused on God’s plan of redemption. Although general revelation reveals that we are under God’s judgment, only special revelation discloses salvation in Christ. Especially since the fall into sin, the process of building theology out of general revelation — what has sometimes been called “natural theology” — must be guided by special revelation. Otherwise, it’s more than likely that we’ll mishandle what God has revealed in creation.

> I would want to be very careful about what we can learn about God through the label or through the category of natural theology. I would want to hang my hat upon a statement like Romans 1:20 that does talk about his majesty, his power. I think those are things you can hang your hat on in terms of what you can learn. But I would want to say immediately that we are in desperate need of special revelation to have a proper perspective… Therefore, you are in need of special revelation to check human reasoning — autonomous, or I should say independent human reasoning — because the created realm yields some things that can also be read and understood problematically. Special revelation of the reality of the Lord Jesus Christ fills in accurately who God is.
> 
> — Dr. Bruce L. Fields

Keeping our need for special revelation in mind, we should also look at our need for general revelation. Why isn’t it enough simply to build our theology from the Bible? What does general revelation contribute that we don’t find in Scripture? 
As we’ve emphasized here, we should never approach general revelation without the authoritative guidance of Scripture. But at the same time, the Scriptures only address a limited number of things directly, and they speak of relatively few things compared to the breadth of general revelation. In fact, every time biblical authors wrote their inspired texts, they built on knowledge that they and their audiences acquired from general revelation. General revelation provided the context within which special revelation could be communicated. And it does the same for us today. 
The need for general revelation appears in at least two ways. On the one hand, what we learn from general revelation enables us to understand special revelation. Think about it this way: We all know that a person must be able to read, or at least understand language to some degree, to access the revelation of Scripture. But how many of us learned how to read or understand language by poring over the words of the Bible without help from other sources? Almost certainly the answer is “none.” Most of us learned language from a parent or caregiver, with the aid of objects and actions involving other elements of creation. And we later learned to read by similar means. Only by building on what we’d learned from these aspects of general revelation were we then able to approach the Bible. 
Our dependence on general revelation is even deeper as we come to the Scriptures. We wouldn’t even have Bibles to read if it were not for what people learned from general revelation. Bible translators learned how to translate, printers learned how to print, and publishers learned how to publish, largely from general revelation. In these very basic senses, we must give attention to general revelation because it equips us to study special revelation.
On the other hand, general revelation is also necessary for applying the Bible successfully to our lives. For example, the Bible touches on many different subjects and gives infallible principles to follow. Yet, to apply these principles we have to know something about the creation to which we are applying them. 
The Bible tells us that husbands are to love their wives, but to apply this biblical principle we have to know some things from general revelation. What is a husband? What is a wife? We also have to know what it means to show love to a particular wife in her specific situation. In this sense, the faithful application of Scripture is always dependent on the general revelation of God. 
So, we see that God has revealed himself in both general and special revelation, and that he expects us to find his revelation both in creation and in the Scriptures. Neither form of revelation was designed to stand on its own. God has ordained that we must hold fast to both as we build our theology.

> Just as our knowledge of special revelation can help us to understand general revelation, our life experiences from general revelation can actually help us understand special revelation too. In other words, our life experiences can help us understand the Bible. One way in which this is apparent frequently throughout the Bible is how the Bible appeals to creation in order to communicate things about God. Psalm 19 says, “the heavens declare the glory of God, the firmament … his handiwork.” What it’s saying there is when we look out at the world, we see certain things, and then when we come to the Bible, we see how those things communicate to us about God… It’s not as if God said, “Let me see how I can illustrate myself. Oh, there’s a rock. I’m like a rock.” But as the Creator, God made the rock so he could turn around and say, “I’m like the rock.” God made the waters so that he could turn around and say “I am living water.” You see, because God is the Lord of creation, the creation is God’s poem that then the skillful interpreter, the scientist, under the lordship of Christ, interprets. But you see that creation, therefore, is intentional by God in order to give the context in which the Bible describes God using creation as a metaphor or imagery.
> 
> — Rev. Michael J. Glodo

Having seen that finding God’s revelation requires looking to both his special and general revelation, we should turn to our second topic: understanding revelation. How are we to understand revelation so that we may derive theology from it? 
