## UNDERSTANDING REVELATION

It’s one thing for us to acknowledge how God has revealed himself and his will to us, but it’s quite another thing for us to formulate proper theological responses to it. Even sincere Christians who are fully committed to relying on God’s general and special revelations go in different directions as they form their theologies. In fact, the history of formal and informal Christian theology can be written in terms of our disagreements over a host of issues related to orthodoxy, orthopraxis and orthopathos. Why is this true? It’s because grasping how divine revelation should impact our theology is a complex process.
To see how this process of understanding revelation takes place, we’ll focus our attention in three directions. First, we’ll explore the hindrance of sin. Second, we’ll explore the illumination of the Holy Spirit. And third, we’ll touch on the results of these dynamics on our theology. Let’s look first at how sin hinders us as we seek to understand God’s revelation. 


### HINDRANCE OF SIN

Every follower of Christ knows that sin is a powerful force, not only in the lives of others, but in our lives as well. True believers have been set free from the tyranny of sin and from God’s eternal judgment against sin. But sin continues to impact us in every area of our lives. Sin corrupts and leaves us building our theology as fallen creatures living in a fallen world. 
As sad as it is, we must acknowledge that sin has had a severe affect on human beings. In fact, it’s so severe that if God were to leave the influence of sin unchecked, we would reject his revelation with all of our strength. Apart from God’s common and special grace, every attempt to acknowledge and develop our theology from God’s revelation would be in vain. In traditional theological terms, this problem is often called the “noetic effects of sin,” a term deriving from the Greek word nous (νοῦς), meaning “mind.” It refers to the ways sin has negatively affected our intellect and understanding.
To explore the hindrance of these noetic effects of sin, we’ll look first at how sin darkens our minds to general revelation, and then at how it does the same to special revelation. Let’s begin with general revelation.


#### General Revelation

As we’ve said, every person on earth knows some dimensions of general revelation. But sin causes us to suppress much of what we know and blinds us to much of what general revelation has to offer. In Romans 1:18, Paul said that sinful Gentiles, who know the truth of general revelation, “by their unrighteousness suppress the truth.” In other words, sin compels us to suppress the truth that is clearly revealed through creation. We deny and turn away from general revelation. In this same chapter, Paul also wrote, in verses 24-28, that as unbelievers violate the moral principles revealed in general revelation, God gives them over to “the lusts of their hearts,” to “dishonorable passions,” and to “a debased mind.” 
Lust and depravity guide our hearts so that we have, as it were, skewed or damaged vision. It’s not that we can’t see any of the truth of general revelation, because we can. Rather, to the degree that we are removed from God’s grace, we twist the facts of general revelation into conformity with our depraved desires. We call the truth lies and lies the truth. We call good evil and evil good. 

> I just don’t see how anyone can think for a moment that sin has not affected the human mind — what we often call the “noetic effects of sin” — because it seems to me that it should be plain that we just sometimes don’t think in the right ways. Now, let’s be truthful. Some people think better than others in different situations, and the same person can change and be good in one situation and bad in another. But the truth is that human beings make mistakes. Human beings even purposefully pervert the truth that they see around them for various reasons… It’s easy for people to be mistaken as to what is good and what is evil. I mean, how many of us don’t have situations that we’ve assessed as being good that we find out later from the Bible really weren’t good? They may feel good, they may appear to be good, they maybe appear to be beneficial by every standard you can imagine, but the Bible says, “No it’s not.” Well, that’s an effect of sin on our minds. We also find that we cannot even draw out the right implications by arguments and by logical thinking sometimes because sin has affected our minds. So, the reality that we always have to grapple with is that even our most refined and careful and cogent ways of thinking have been impacted by sin. 
> 
> — Dr. Richard L. Pratt, Jr. 


> Romans 1 speaks of the external revelation of God, in a general sense, through the attributes being clearly seen, and then Romans 2 speaks about the internal aspect of general revelation, which is a sense of right and wrong. In order to discern particularly that sense of right and wrong, we have to go to the Scriptures. We are fallen, and our interpretation of our sense of right and wrong is a fallen interpretation, and the only objective standard that we have, then, is the Word of God. So, the Scripture is absolutely necessary for clarity when it comes to ethical standards. 
> 
> — Dr. Jeff Lowman

Having seen the hindrance of sin in our ability to make appropriate use of general revelation, we should now turn our attention to special revelation. How does sin affect our use of special revelation, especially the revelation of God in Scripture?


#### Special Revelation

> Sin is more than an external hindrance to our understanding of Scripture. It’s also an internal hindrance. For instance, Romans 7 describes sin as an internal alien power that overpowers our ability to even desire truth. And so, we can’t just assume that when we pick up a Bible we are naturally going to interpret it correctly. If we do, we’re making a grave mistake. This explains a lot of our disagreements about the meaning of Scripture. We simply underestimate the power of sin within us… That’s why Ephesians 1 says that Paul prays desperately that the Ephesians will be illuminated by the Holy Spirit to understand the teachings that he’s passing on to them… So, as believers, if we want to be unified and work toward unity in our understanding of what Scripture teaches, we have to be to face the magnitude of sin’s power within us, pray for the power of the Spirit to overcome it, and to work towards unity in our interpretation of Scripture and the doctrines that come out of it. 
> 
> — Dr. Andrew Parlee

The Bible itself shows that sinful human beings resist the teaching of Scripture if left without the mercy of God. Jesus commented on this in John 5:39, 40 when he said that the Pharisees misused the Old Testament. Peter commented in much the same way in 2 Peter 3:15, 16 when he said that people distort Paul’s writings as they do other Scriptures. Apart from God’s grace, sinful human beings tend to mishandle and to misappropriate the Scriptures.
This problem of sinful misinterpretation of the Bible is not limited to unbelievers. It infects believers as well. One example that comes to mind easily is how many European and American theologians believed that the Scriptures supported the African slave trade of the 17th, 18th and 19th centuries. How did this happen? How could Christians so misconstrue the Scriptures? The answer is that sin hinders even believers’ ability to handle the Scriptures. No matter the strength of our intellect or the depth of our biblical knowledge, we should be utterly convinced that we are all twisting and perverting special revelation in some way. The more we are aware of our shortcomings and biases, the more we can prevent this type of misreading. But sadly, we’ll all go to the grave unaware of some of the ways we have misread the Bible.

> Our interpretations of Scripture are accountable to the authority of Scripture in a way that Scripture is not accountable to the authority of our interpretation. Now, we want to be careful how we understand that. We don’t want to indicate that we cannot understand Scripture accurately… But we always have to allow our interpretation to be accountable to the Scriptures themselves. It is possible to misinterpret. It’s possible to not consider all of the relevant data. It’s possible that there is some piece of information that we’re missing about the historical situation of the original text itself. And so, we always want to understand that our interpretations are revisable in light of what Scripture teaches, and we come back to that authority again and again and again.
> 
> — Dr. Robert G. Lister

Now that we’ve seen how the hindrance of sin deeply affects our ability to handle general and special revelation properly, we should turn to our best hope for understanding revelation: the illumination of the Holy Spirit. 
