### ILLUMINATION OF HOLY SPIRIT

Students and scholars alike often act as if they can build sound Christian theology, based on God’s revelation, simply by working hard at it. They believe that adherence to rigorously logical methods will enable them to reach the goals of orthodoxy, orthopraxis and orthopathos. But this simply isn’t the case. Now, we must certainly apply ourselves as faithful servants to our task, but to overcome the impact of sin, we have to go much further. We have to get personal — personal with the third person of the Trinity, the Holy Spirit. He illumines our minds so that we may grasp and properly apply God’s revelation in our theology. 
All too often, Christians do not understand the extent to which deriving true theology from God’s revelation results from the personal ministry of the Holy Spirit in our lives. Instead, we put our confidence in the natural abilities we possess as human beings. In the spirit of Enlightenment modernism, we think we can build a true theology if we are rational and apply well-defined methods to God’s revelation. But in reality, our rational abilities do not exist in isolation from the fallen condition of creation. In our fallen state, sin darkens our minds, including our linguistic and logical abilities, so that we often fail to understand revelation properly. Something more is needed — something that empowers our rational, linguistic and, for that matter, empirical capacities. We need something that enables us to understand general and special revelation as they actually are and thus to form true theology. Only illumination from the Spirit of God can bring such light to our blind eyes. 
To explore the illumination of the Holy Spirit, let’s look at how he grants insight into special revelation and then how he opens our eyes to see general revelation as well. We’ll start with special revelation.


#### Special Revelation

In traditional Protestant theology, the term “illumination” is frequently applied to the Spirit’s work of giving insight into special revelation. The Holy Spirit works within us, renewing our minds, so that we can apprehend, accept and apply the Word of God. Listen to the way Paul stated this truth in Ephesians 1:17-18:

> [I pray] that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give you the Spirit of wisdom and of revelation in the knowledge of him, having the eyes of your hearts enlightened, that you may know what is the hope to which he has called you (Ephesians 1:17-18).

Now, it’s important to realize that the Spirit’s illumination of special revelation works in different ways. On the one hand, the Scriptures make it clear that the Spirit of God operates in non-redemptive ways so that even unbelievers understand many aspects of special revelation. 
For instance, according to Numbers 24:2, the Spirit of God came upon Balaam, a pagan prophet, granting him insight. And in John 11:49-51, Caiaphas, the high priest who played a significant role in Jesus’ crucifixion, prophesied truly concerning the meaning of Jesus’ death. In Matthew 21:45, 46, the Pharisees understood that Jesus’ parable of the wicked tenants applied to them, but they responded with a murderous plot rather than genuine repentance. In a similar way, the writer of Hebrews, in 6:4, spoke specifically of the illumination of the Spirit for people whose salvation he later questioned. 
We may call these examples the “common operations of the Spirit,” in the context of common grace. These are some of the many non-redemptive roles that the Spirit performs in this world. This is why even unbelievers can understand and teach theology that accords with the Scriptures. It’s the result of the Spirit’s work on them, even though they aren’t redeemed.
At the same time, it’s important to remember that the church is the temple of the Spirit. The church is the repository of his special presence and ministry in the world. He gives his redeemed people saving knowledge of the Word of God. So, it would be right to expect the Spirit’s illuminating work to be greater among believers than unbelievers. In fact, we’d be right to expect that believing theologians always learn from the Spirit in ways that far exceed unbelievers. 
The vital role of the Spirit’s illumination of our minds toward special revelation raises a very important matter for every Christian theologian. Because the Spirit of God alone illumines us, Christian theologians must consciously and sincerely devote themselves to keeping in step with the Spirit. Christian theology is not an impersonal project that we accomplish in our own strength. Highly personal contact with and sanctified sensitivity to the work of the Holy Spirit is required if we hope to derive true theology from special revelation. We have grounds to hope that our theological conclusions are properly derived from the Scriptures only as we give ourselves wholeheartedly to seeking the lead of the Spirit of grace. 

> The unbeliever at one level may be able to do a better job with any one piece of Scripture than a believer would do in understanding the context, or understanding the author’s intent, or understanding the language in which it’s written to be able to translate. So, there are these isolated ways in which you could say an unbeliever would read it and get as much as a believer from it, in a way, from a fact standpoint or understanding these pieces about the language there… But the work of the Holy Spirit is such that we should be more and more sanctified, and the Holy Spirit should be more and more active over time in opening up what God intends the Scripture to say. So that’s, I think, one of the fundamental places in which the unbeliever and the believer are going to approach things differently. 
> 
> — Dr. Tim Sansbury

With the Spirit’s illumination of special revelation in mind, let’s turn to illumination and general revelation. 


#### General Revelation

Most Christians would readily agree that we need the illumination of the Holy Spirit as we approach God’s special revelation in Scripture. Many of us regularly pray just before we begin to read from the Scriptures because we know how much we need the Spirit’s help. But we also need the personal ministry of the Holy Spirit when we reflect on general revelation. The revelation of God through creation is so vast and complex that it takes much more than our natural abilities when we study and live Christian theology. We need wisdom. And who gives this kind of wisdom? The Spirit of God. 
In Daniel 5:14, the pagan king Belshazzar recognized that Daniel’s wisdom was of divine origin. In Proverbs 2:6, we read that all wisdom comes from God. Similarly, according to Exodus 31:3, the artisans Bezalel and Oholiab performed craftsmanship well because they were filled with the Holy Spirit. These and other similar passages teach us that the Spirit’s illumination is not necessary only for special revelation but for general revelation as well. Listen to what John Calvin said in book 2, chapter 2 of his Institutes of the Christian Religion. Here he spoke about the work of the Spirit as people discover truth in general revelation: 

> Whenever we come upon these matters in secular writers, let that admirable light of truth shining in them teach us that the mind of man, though fallen and perverted from its wholeness, is nevertheless clothed and ornamented with God’s excellent gifts. If we regard the Spirit of God as the sole fountain of truth, we shall neither reject the truth itself, nor despise it wherever it shall appear, unless we wish to dishonor the Spirit of God… But if the Lord has willed that we be helped in physics, dialectic, mathematics, and other like disciplines, by the work and ministry of the ungodly, let us use this assistance.

As Calvin explained, the Spirit of God teaches both believers and unbelievers the truth of general revelation. He is “the sole fountain of truth.” For this reason, attempting to build Christian theology in the power of the flesh, even with regard to matters related to general revelation, is as foolish as seeking salvation in the power of the flesh. 
All of this is to say that successfully deriving theology from God’s revelation is not something that happens automatically or something you and I can do in our own strength. When done properly, understanding revelation is a humbling, religious experience in which we constantly crash into the limits of our natural abilities and find ourselves constantly renewing our dependence on the Spirit of God. 

> So, when Calvin talks about not despising the truth wherever it may be found, it’s important to remember the context in which he’s saying this… What his purpose is in saying this is that humankind is predisposed to searching after the truth. This is one of the things that distinguishes us from, for example, the animals, is that we have an inclination, an inherent inclination towards pursuing the truth. And as such, God, who is ultimately the fount of all truth, speaks truth through his human creatures. But he does so in a way that’s up to him. It’s not up to us. Truth does not reside in the human being itself, it resides in God… And so, when Calvin talks about not rejecting truth wherever it may be found, or condemning it if it’s outside of the Christian circle, he’s doing so in a way that, I think, recognizes that truth is ultimately God’s and not the product of some sort of human contribution.
> 
> — Dr. Scott Manor

The dynamics of the hindrance of sin and the illumination of the Holy Spirit in our understanding of general and special revelation prepare us to expect certain results in the process of forming our theology. Often the tension between sin and the Spirit causes us to face situations where the findings of special and general revelation seem incompatible. 
