### RESULTS

Building theology is relatively simple so long as everything we believe the Scriptures teach fits easily with our understanding of general revelation. It’s not difficult to believe that the Bible’s historical record is true so long as archeological evidence supports it. It’s not hard to uphold the standards of behavior taught in the Bible so long as our cultural mores concur. We easily affirm what the Scriptures teach about our emotions, so long as they fit easily with our daily experiences. But let’s face it, often we read one thing in the Bible and find something that seems to contradict it in our broader experience of life. As we’ve seen, Christ’s followers must build theology both on God’s general and special revelations. So what should we do when they seem incompatible with each other? 
In the first place, we should enter such situations with the firm conviction that general and special revelation never actually contradict each other. In both general and special revelation, the same God is speaking — the God who only tells truth because he cannot lie. Moreover, we should also realize that God has no difficulty reconciling what he reveals in creation with what he reveals in Scripture. No matter how at odds these two sources of revelation may appear to us, we know from God’s point of view, and thus in reality, that they are both true and quite compatible. 
In the second place, we must remember that what we know from special and general revelation is never dealing with revelation per se, but with our understandings of revelation. These understandings always fall short of perfection. Although general and special revelation never actually conflict because they are both from God, our understandings of them certainly can conflict because they are from us. 
When we encounter apparent discrepancies between special and general revelation, there are four main ways to evaluate the situation. First, it’s always possible that we have misunderstood special revelation and that we must change our interpretation of Scripture without rejecting the Bible itself. 
Second, conflict may arise because we have misunderstood general revelation. Frequently, we draw conclusions from experience that must be corrected by Scripture. 
Third, we may have misunderstood both special and general revelation. It’s always feasible that our experiences of the world don’t seem to match up with biblical teaching because we’ve failed to grasp Scripture correctly, and we’ve failed to assess our experiences correctly. 
Fourth, we may have encountered a mystery that is simply beyond our human comprehension. For example, think of the Trinity. Our experience of general revelation certainly doesn’t lead us to expect three persons to be one being. Yet, this is what the Bible teaches us about God. How can we reconcile these two viewpoints? We can’t. The doctrine of the Trinity is a mystery beyond our grasp. 
Now, as a practical matter, we can’t always tell which of these four situations we’re facing. Many times, we must simply act on the basis of where we put the burden of proof. Do we place a heavier burden of proof on our interpretation of Scripture or our interpretation of general revelation? Well, Christians go in different directions in this matter. 
On the one hand, Christians who are considered more liberal tend to accept their understanding of general revelation more readily than their understanding of Scripture. But Christians who are considered more conservative tend to accept their understanding of special revelation over general revelation when a conflict arises. 
The second strategy is the better part of wisdom. Unless the evidence of our reflections on general revelation is overwhelming, we should follow what we understand the Scriptures to teach. Christ and his apostles endorsed the Scriptures as our guide for understanding life. So, we must be ready to submit to them when apparent conflicts arise. 

> I’ve found it helpful to think about three possible solutions whenever we see an apparent contradiction between general and special revelation. The first is that we’ve not adequately understood general revelation. This is very common, you know, as we go about the disciplines of science or history or archeology or various things. Just over the course of time, we’re oftentimes discovering that previous ideas or things that were just accepted for truth, we find to be in error. It happens all the time. Just wait long enough and you’ll learn that. So, we know that always our observation of the world is only partial… And oftentimes our interpretation of Scripture can be off. We can misunderstand it. In fact, we often do. And so that’s also a possible solution. And then there’s a third particular option there, and that’s that there’s some combination of both. That is, we have not adequately understood general revelation, and at the same time are not fully understanding the truth of Scripture in a particular area. And so I think that is a helpful way, at least for me, as I try to resolve what sometimes seem to be apparent contradictions, and yet at the same time allow us to affirm both the inerrancy and the infallibility of Scripture.  
> 
> — Rev. Hutch Garmany

As Paul said in 2 Timothy 3:16-17: 

> All Scripture is breathed out by God and profitable … that the man of God may be complete, equipped for every good work (2 Timothy 3:16-17). 


> Second Timothy 3:16 and following are very much in line with what you find in a lot of parts of the Bible. On the night that he is betrayed, for example, the Lord Jesus prays to his Father, “Sanctify them [through] Your truth. Your word is truth.” In other words, what believers require for sanctification is the Word of God. And so, here we’re reminded that all Scripture really is God-breathed. It’s breathed out by God. But that’s not merely a raw fact in itself. It has a purpose connected with it. It’s useful, because of the fact that it is God-breathed, to do a variety of things — to correct Christians when they go astray, to rebuke them when they really need to repent, to instruct in all of the ways of the mind of God that breed righteousness within us, and so on, so on. So, our entire shaping of life and thought and priorities and conduct and ethic and belief systems, worldview and so on, all comes finally from the Word of God, mediated by the Spirit. This Spirit-breathed Word, this God-breathed Word is then used by the Spirit to shape us and build us up into increasing conformity to Christ. 
> 
> — Dr. D.A. Carson

At the same time, however, we must always remember that because our understandings of Scripture are flawed by sin, we may need to revisit issues time and again. The practice of faithful believers through the ages has been to yield their judgments to what they believe the Bible teaches, while still knowing that they may need to correct their flawed understandings of the Bible later. This way of wisdom and submission calls upon us to construct theology out of what we sincerely believe the Bible teaches.
As we’ve seen, relying on revelation to develop our theology is riddled with difficulties resulting from the dynamics of sin and the Spirit. The complexities involved in both finding revelation and understanding revelation lead us to our third main topic: developing confidence in our theological positions in the face of so many obstacles.
