## DEVELOPING CONFIDENCE

At one time or another, many of us have met theologians who are far too confident about far too many things they believe. They act as if they have mastered theological reflection. They have answers for every question, and they think their answers are unquestionable. Then again, most of us have also met theologians who have far too little confidence about far too many things they believe. They often realize the complexities of theology and end up answering lots of questions with, “I don’t know.” These kinds of people represent extremes. But these extremes raise some important questions as we build our theology. How confident should we be about what we believe? And is there a way to come to some sort of balance in these matters? 
To explore developing confidence in theology, we’ll touch on three considerations. First, we’ll see that confidence in theological positions has an analog quality. Second, we’ll explore how confidence results from a process of deference. And third, we’ll examine how we should establish the appropriate alignment of our levels of confidence on different theological subjects. Let’s look first at the idea that confidence in theological conclusions has an analog quality.


### ANALOG QUALITY

To understand what we mean by an analog quality of confidence in theology, it helps to draw on an analogy. Consider a simple on-off light switch. This kind of switch is similar to the way many evangelicals think about their beliefs. They often think simply of things that they know and things that they don’t know. “I know Christ is the Son of God.” “I know God is Triune.” These affirmations are firm beliefs. Yet, evangelicals have lists of things they consider unknowable or unknown. “I don’t know how a good God allows evil.” “I don’t know when Christ will return.” These kinds of statements indicate that we do not know what to think. We have no confidence in positions taken on these subjects. This approach to theological convictions is adequate in many circumstances. It says simply, “I know about this, but I don’t know about that.” 
Yet, when we look more closely at the whole range of things that we know and don’t know as Christians, we see rather quickly that the situation is more complex than this model suggests. Most of us are familiar with a dimmer light switch that has a range of lower and higher settings. In this kind of switch, the electrical current is not simply on or off, but flows with more or less strength depending on the position of the switch. At the extremes, the current is fully off and fully on, but the entire range in between is important as well, because it provides softer to brighter light. In many respects, these analog light switches provide a very helpful model for assessing the confidence we should have in different theological positions. We don’t simply have confidence in some beliefs and no confidence in others. We have a whole range of more or less confidence in theological positions.
Consider the ways we think about things outside of theology. Every human being holds to many beliefs. For example, you may believe that it will not rain today. You may also believe that you have a job. And, if you’re a parent, you almost certainly believe that you have a child. Now, even though you can say you believe all of these things are true, you don’t hold these beliefs with the same level of confidence. 
One way to test your level of confidence is by asking how much pressure it would take to give up each of these beliefs. It probably wouldn’t take much to change your belief that it will not rain today. A few drops of rain falling on your head would instantly change your mind. Even a weather report predicting high probability of rain would make you carry an umbrella. You don’t have much confidence in that belief. 
But, if you go to work every day, you probably believe that you have a job. You’d be heavily invested in that belief. It would take much more than a news report or article to change your mind. Even if you received a letter telling you that you were not employed, you’d want it confirmed in person. 
But consider, for instance, that you’re a parent. What would it take for you to stop believing that you have a child? There is so much confirming this belief that it would take an unimaginable amount of evidence to make you believe otherwise, a lot more than anything else on this list.
Now, in many respects what is true in common experience is also true in theology. We hold our theological beliefs with varying degrees of confidence. In an earlier lesson we spoke of orthodoxy, orthopraxis, and orthopathos as forming webs of multiple reciprocities. At this point we need to expand this model slightly. It helps to think of this web of multiple reciprocities as suspended in a sphere. When this sphere is cross-sectioned and its interior is exposed, we see that our web of beliefs is arranged in concentric layers. 
In the outer layer, our beliefs are configured loosely. The outer layer represents the many theological positions that belong on the periphery of our web of beliefs. We have little confidence about them; we have little commitment to them. And we find ourselves changing, removing, and adding to these configurations of beliefs with ease nearly all the time.
In the center, or core of the sphere, our web of beliefs is so tightly interwoven that it appears to be nearly one unified solid. The center of our web consists of our core beliefs, the central theological configurations of our faith which we hold with high levels of confidence. It’s very difficult to modify, remove or add to these core beliefs. Because when we do, there’s a dramatic ripple effect that reconfigures large portions of everything else we believe. 
Finally, between the core and the outer layer is a series of layers made up of more or less tightly-woven webs of belief. The layers closer to the center are more densely configured and are more difficult to modify. The layers further from the center are less densely configured and are less difficult to change. 

> It’s really important for us to distinguish between things that are really clear and certain in Scripture and things that are much less certain, mainly because the Bible does that. In the Gospels, in the Epistles, in every part of the New Testament, it is really clear that Jesus Christ is our Savior and our Lord, the Son of God who is fully God and fully man. And yet, when it comes to something like the millennium, our eschatological views, only once in Scripture is a thousand years mentioned — in Revelation 20. And so, there’s a lot of debate among Christians about what this thousand-year reign of Christ means and what it looks like. And because of the fact that it’s not emphasized in Scripture, we should respect the fact that Christians at different times have had different views on that matter. Some things are really clear, and some things are less certain. We need to know the difference. 
> 
> — Dr. Gregory R. Perry

Put simply, developing confidence in our theology not only has an analog quality, but it also requires a process of deference. In this process, we submit ourselves to ways the Holy Spirit teaches and convinces us of our theological positions. 


### PROCESS OF DEFERENCE

The Holy Spirit illumines us so that we may believe the truth of God’s revelation. But he teaches and convinces God’s people in different ways. As many examples in Scriptures indicate, the Spirit of God is free to shape our theological convictions in extraordinary ways. Still, it’s also fair to say that there are ordinary ways in which the Spirit of God grants us theological convictions. This variety of the Spirit’s work is akin to the many ways God providentially directs every dimension of history. 
Chapter 5, section 3 of the Westminster Confession of Faith summarizes the teaching of Scripture on God’s providence nicely. It says:

**God in his ordinary providence, maketh use of means, yet is free to work without, above, and against them, at his pleasure.**

This statement describes how God uses “means” — second causes, or created instruments — to carry out his will on earth. He works out his plan ordinarily through second causes, using created instruments to accomplish his goals. But at the same time, God is not locked into this ordinary way. He is also free to accomplish his will “without, above, and against” created instruments.

> God is sovereign. We all live, move and have our being through him, but there are secondary causes. So, if I want to walk across the room, I can’t walk across the room outside of God's sustaining power. And yet, if I want to walk across the room, I don’t just float. I actually get up. My muscles start to move. I take one step in front of the other. And so, the secondary causes of me getting from here to there is the leg movements, the muscle contractions. All of that that’s going on are secondary causes. And it allows us to not pit primary and secondary cause against one another. So, the reality is, if I went to the other side of this room, and the way I got there was not by walking, but instead, all of a sudden, I started to float, and I flew over there, in the medieval period, what we would call that is a miracle, because a miracle is the absence of secondary causes. So, God can do miracles, but the normal way God works is in and through secondary causes.
>  
> — Dr. Kelly M. Kapic

In much the same way, it’s helpful to distinguish between the extraordinary and ordinary ways that the Holy Spirit illumines us and confirms our theological position. From time to time, all Christians have experienced insights and strong convictions from the Holy Spirit, even when we weren’t looking for them. Something comes to mind when we don’t expect it. Commitments swell within us with no explanation. In many situations like these, the Spirit of God is working without, above, and against the second causes he normally uses. While these kinds of extraordinary works of the Spirit are important, formal theology is much more concerned with the ordinary processes that the Spirit uses. 
As we saw in an earlier lesson, the church has acknowledged three primary areas for formal theological training found in traditional seminaries: the biblical division, which concerns the exegesis of Scripture; the doctrinal and historical division, which concerns interaction in community; and the practical theology division which concerns Christian living. 
In line with this wisdom, it’s very helpful to describe the ordinary ways in which the Spirit grants theological confidence as a process of deferring to the influences of the exegesis of Scripture, interaction in community, and Christian living. We won’t explore all three of these influences in detail, but it will help to introduce them here. First, the Spirit of God illumines and confirms us as we learn how to defer to the influence of proper biblical exegesis or interpretation.
