#### Exegesis of Scripture

> The word “exegesis” is simply a word meaning “to explain; to draw out,” and we’re drawing out meaning from the text. It’s not from the author independently of the text, it’s not from the reader independently, or even in conjunction with the text, but we say the text says something. 
> 
> — Dr. Guy Waters

The field of exegesis — learning the skills by which we may discern the teaching of Scripture — is one of the most important, common and effective means of illumination and confidence building. Do you want to know what God has revealed in Scripture? Do you want to be sure of this? Ordinarily, we must employ exegetical skills that equip us to handle the Bible responsibly. Deference to the exegesis of Scripture is vital to the process of developing Christian theology.

> When we develop Christian theology, we must carefully examine the Scriptures in order to be able to fulfill the principles in the right way — in our culture, in our time — in order to apply the principles that were taught in a different culture and in a different time, to our present culture and our present time. This helps us to live Christian theology the way Jesus revealed it and taught it. Failure to do so may lead us to develop a different theology from the one Jesus taught. So, we must carefully analyze the Scriptures in order to follow the same steps that Jesus taught us.
>  
> — Rev. Pablo Torres, translation

Second, our process of deference not only includes the exegesis of Scripture, but the Spirit of God commonly uses interaction in community to illumine our minds and confirm our convictions. 


#### Interaction in Community

Direct biblical exegesis is not the only influence we need in theology. We also need the help of general revelation, especially interaction with other people. In fact, direct exegesis without community is very dangerous. As we see time and again, the first step toward heresy is often exegesis. Interacting with others, learning and evaluating their opinions of what God has revealed, should be crucial in our theology. In the broadest sense, God has ordained interaction with the entire human race to help us. 
But interaction among believers, where the Spirit dwells in his fullness, is especially important to the process. When interacting in community we ask questions such as, “What has the church of the past believed about these matters? What do godly believers around me today say about this or that issue? How do my personal opinions compare to the opinions of others?” Deference to community interaction is vital to the process of deriving theology from God’s revelation.

> We, as Protestants, depend on the interpretive community, the interpretive community, because Scripture does say that we as saints must evaluate every declaration whether it be true or not true. So, we do not rely on the fact that someone would say, “Look, the Holy Spirit has revealed this to me.” As we know in Africa there are so many “revelations” that people get from the Holy Spirit. So, our duty as brothers, we say, “Hold on brother. Do we affirm and confirm your interpretation or not?” … So, we also depend on the interpretation of the community.
> 
> — Prof. Jorum Mugari


> The Scripture is given to the church, and therefore, when you read Scripture you have to read Scripture, you have to study Scripture, you have to learn to pray Scripture, and if you’re going to learn to live Scripture, you have to do it within the fellowship of the body of Christ… But not only that, where pastors and elders and those who are spiritually mature are able to help us discover in our lives what really are the issues that keep me from experiencing the transforming power of God through my encounter with the Word of God. Therefore, when we read Scripture, we have to understand we always are to read Scripture in fellowship with God’s church. 
> 
> — Dr. Steve Blakemore

Third, in addition to deferring to exegesis and interaction in community, we must also acknowledge that Christian living plays a very important role in granting us confidence as we follow the Spirit’s lead. 


#### Christian Living

Living for Christ prepares us for good biblical exegesis and interaction with others. And a faithful walk is also the arena within which we test our theological positions. Things like experiences of success and failure, prayers, worship, and service to God are dimensions of general revelation that are also instruments the Spirit ordinarily uses to illumine and to convince us of theological positions. Who we are and what we experience as we live for Christ is a third major influence to which we must defer. The Spirit uses Christian living to illumine our minds and to give us confidence that we have understood God’s revelation correctly.
 
There’s something very different going on when we read the Bible in that it’s not just a matter of interpreting what the author intended in the historical sense. It’s not just a matter of trying to figure out the background of a text. It is really a matter of engaging with God, because we believe the Scriptures are inspired by God, breathed out by God, and are the one of the main places of revelation where God speaks of himself and also meets with his people, and with the individual as well as the corporate gathering of God’s people. And so, one’s spiritual condition is actually part of that whole interpretive process.

— Dr. Jonathan T. Pennington 

Up to this point, we’ve seen that developing theological confidence has an analog quality, or is a matter of degree, and that the Spirit of God ordinarily uses a process of deference to give us confidence. Now we’re in a position to see how we should bring appropriate alignment to the levels of confidence we have in our various beliefs. 


### APPROPRIATE ALIGNMENT

When we speak about aligning our levels of confidence in theology, we have in mind how important it is to determine the strength of our many theological convictions in responsible ways. We need to avoid making this or that belief more central than another simply according to our own judgment. Rather, we are wise to consider how exegesis of Scripture, interaction in community and individual Christian living work together to support what we believe. The concept of how to appropriately align the confidence we have in our theological positions can be rather complex. But there’s a helpful model for understanding how appropriate alignment of convictions works. We’ll call this model the “cone of certainty.” 
Imagine that we remove a section from the sphere of our beliefs and create a cone that extends from the outer edge to the core. Setting this cone upright, the layers display a scale of confidence on which we hold our various beliefs. The top of the cone is our core beliefs. The bottom of the cone is the outer edge of our beliefs. In between the top and bottom are beliefs that we hold with different levels of conviction. 
One of our major responsibilities as Christian theologians is to determine at what level to place particular beliefs. Once we’ve decided that a theological position belongs in the Christian faith, we want to know where we should put it in the cone of certainty. Should it be toward the top — held with higher levels of confidence? Or should it be toward the bottom — held with lower levels of confidence? 
Now, there’s no doubt that the Holy Spirit will at times create levels of confidence within us in extraordinary ways. We may find ourselves utterly convinced of something with little justification. We may doubt a point of view with little ability to explain why. At times, we simply sense or feel that something is true or false. We should be cautious about these kinds of experiences and submit them to the evaluation of God’s Word, but these extraordinary works of the Spirit should not be ignored.
Still, how does the Spirit ordinarily lead us to determine where to place our beliefs in the cone of certainty? In general terms, we may say that, with rare exceptions, we should align our levels of confidence with the results of faithful deference to the influences of exegesis, interaction in community and Christian living. As we seek to come under their influences, the Spirit brings many of our convictions into appropriate alignment.
On a practical level, deferring to the influences of exegesis, interaction in community, and Christian living requires us to ask at least two basic questions. First, how much harmony exists among exegesis, interaction in community, and Christian living on a particular subject? The more harmony there is, the more confidence we should have that we’ve understood a particular matter correctly. Second, when there is significant disharmony, is one or more influence clearer than the others? When one or two influences are more well-defined than the other or others, we tend to place the belief supported by the clear influence higher in the cone of certainty. But, when the influence of exegesis, interaction, and Christian living are disharmonious and nearly equal in their lack of clarity, we tend to place this belief lower in the cone of certainty. 

> The influences that cause us to set different beliefs at different places, well, they’re varied. But you can summarize them in terms of what we think the Scriptures teach because the Scriptures are very clear about some things and not so clear about others. And that tends to make this go up and down. You can also see the influence of the Christian church or the community, our interactions with other Christians. Because as you see the body of Christ over the centuries affirming this belief over and over and over again, it ought to give us an expectation that even if, personally, we’re not that confident, it’s probably very confident that we should believe in those sorts of those things, or very certain that we should believe in those sorts of things. And then the third element would be, I guess, our individual Christian experience, our Christian living, our experiences of life. Now, keep in mind that the exegesis of the Bible has to do with the special revelation of God, and the life in community with other Christians and our individual living has to do with the general revelation of God. So, we’re still depending on God to teach us things, no matter what is influencing us here, and we’re seeking Holy Spirit to help us discern what God is teaching. But as these three elements, these three influences impact us — interpreting the Bible, interacting with other Christians, living our Christian lives — as they influence us, sometimes they’ll push up how much confidence we should have in certain beliefs and certain practices and certain feelings that we have. And sometimes they’ll push us down. And generally speaking, though it’s not always the case, but generally speaking, the more harmonious our interpretation of the Bible, and what the body of Christ is saying as a whole in our interacting with them, and our individual experiences are, the more harmonious they are, the more we tend to have confidence that we’ve put a belief in the right place. 
> 
> — Dr. Richard L. Pratt, Jr.

