	
# Theological Foundations – Module One – The Articles of the Faith
## Discussion Questions 

1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	Why did the church believe it was important to create and use a creed?


3.	Describe the Trinity in terms of persons and nature, and explain the different work attributed to each by the Apostles’ Creed.


4.	How would you answer someone who said that all we need is the Bible, and that creeds such as the Apostles’ Creed are unnecessary?


5.	How can we properly use the Apostles’ Creed without undermining the doctrine of Sola Scriptura?


6.	How can we call the church “catholic” or “universal” when there is so much disagreement among Christians today?


7.	In what ways could the teachings of the Apostles’ Creed bring unity within your church? 


8.	How can the Apostles’ Creed help you relate to Christians from different backgrounds or beliefs?


9.	How might the Apostles’ Creed help us discern teachings that are not truly Christian?


10.	How should the assurance of the forgiveness of sins impact our lives?


11.	How can the hope of everlasting life help us face the sufferings and trials of life, including death?


12.	What portions of the Creed do you find most challenging or difficult to grasp?
 
REVIEW STATEMENT on THE ARTICLES OF THE FAITH - IMPORTANCE: The doctrines of the Apostles' Creed are so clearly taught in Scripture, and so central to it, that Christians should not accept any idea that contradicts these teachings. As such, the Apostles' Creed serves as a standard by which we can judge the ideas that people teach.

CASE STUDY: Ernesto was a new Christian. He came into contact with some people from a church that taught that obedience to God always leads to health and wealth. These people told him that if you are sick, poor, or suffering in some other way, then you aren't a true follower of Christ. The more you obey (including tithing to the church) the healthier and wealthier you will be. As a new Christian, Ernesto didn't know whether this was biblical or not.
## Reflection Questions
1.	Have you met people who believe in a “health and wealth” gospel? Describe your experience.
2.	Have you ever believed that being a good Christian will bring you health and wealth? If so, explain.
3.	What's the difference between God giving his people material blessings and the "health and wealth" movement?
4.	How would you counsel Ernesto based on the Apostles' Creed?
5.	What are some other trends you've seen held by Christians that you think go against the teachings of the Apostles' Creed?
## Action Assignments 
•	If you know someone who might believe something that goes against the Apostles' Creed, pray for an opportunity to talk with them about this. Look for the opportunity and take it if it comes.
•	As you memorize the Apostles' Creed, commit its teachings to your heart and know where the doctrines it contains are found in the Bible so that you will be prepared to defend Christianity against many false teachings.

