	
# Theological Foundations – Module Nine – Relying on Revelation
## Discussion Questions 

1.	What was the most significant thing you learned in the lesson or something in the lesson you didn’t quite understand?


2.	What is special revelation? What does it teach us?


3.	Describe the interconnections between general and special revelation in terms of their overlap and necessity.


4.	Why is it important to derive our theology from revelation?


5.	How does sin hinder our understanding God’s general and special revelation?


6.	How does the Holy Spirit help us understand God’s special and general revelation?


7.	How should we handle apparent conflicts between general and special revelation?


8.	What does it mean to say that theological conclusions are analogue rather than binary?


9.	Describe the process of deferring to exegesis, community, and Christian living. Why is this process helpful? 


10.	How can we assign proper levels of confidence to our various beliefs?


11.	How might your understanding of God through general revelation draw you closer to him?


12.	How might understanding the similarities and differences between special and general revelation change the way a person does theology?



REVIEW STATEMENT on UNDERSTANDING REVELATION - RESULTS: When it seems that general and special revelation conflict with each other, give priority to special revelation and hold your conclusions loosely as you seek greater clarity.

CASE STUDY: Abel is a sincere Christian who wants to grow in the Lord and use his gifts effectively. Because of special revelation he knows he should be witnessing to unbelievers. On the other hand, because of general revelation — gained from his experience living in his culture — he also knows how difficult it is to meet unbelievers, and to find anyone who wants to talk about Christ. In practice, Abel has put witnessing on hold because he can't find a good fit between special and general revelation.
## Reflection Questions
1.	What do you think of Abel’s approach to finding a good fit between special and general revelation? 
2.	Discuss in your learning community how some doctrines of Scripture seem to contradict our everyday experience of general revelation. For example, the Bible teaches that God is three and God is one. We don’t know of anything like that in our experience. You could talk of one family and three members of the family. But that’s not the same. In that case, you can’t say that the father is the family, that the mother is the family, or that the child is the family. But in the case of the Trinity, the Bible affirms that the Father is God, the Son is God, the Spirit is God, yet there’s only one God. Similar tension can be found when we think about the Biblical teaching of God’s sovereignty and our responsibility. Our experience of general revelation leads us to believe that these don’t go together. But the Bible clearly affirms them. Discuss these mysteries in your learning community. 
3.	Discuss the following: When you find teachings in Scripture like those mentioned in the previous point, you may not be able to resolve the apparent conflict. However, that’s not a problem because each facet of the mystery has unambiguous implications for obedience. For example, because God is sovereign, we should not worry. Because we are responsible, we don’t sit around waiting for God to do what he commands us to do.
## Action Assignments
•	Make time — strive to do it daily — to mediate. Meditation is a biblical command (Joshua 1:8, Psalm 1:2). Biblical meditation is not emptying your mind. Nor is it simply thinking theoretically about Scripture. Rather, it is thinking about the relationship between special and general revelation with a view to action. It’s thinking about how to apply Scripture to your daily life in a way that gives a certain priority to Scripture and in a way that leads to action. Think about Scripture, try to put it into practice, and then look at your attempt to put it into practice in light of Scripture. Many people find it helpful to write down their meditations in a journal. That way you can go back later and remind yourself of what you were thinking about.

