
# Study Guide 
# Old Testament Foundations
# Module Five – The Right Direction

Instructions: Each study guide is divided into sections with time codes that correspond to the main categories covered in each module. Sections contain two main components: an Outline for Taking Notes and Review Questions. You should utilize the Outline for Taking Notes while you watch the video lectures, and then answer the Review Questions in preparation for the module quiz. For more information about best ways to utilize the study guides, refer back to the Student Orientation Manual. Also, be sure to save the study guides as they will be an excellent resource to prepare for this course’s final exam.

**********************************

## OUTLINE FOR TAKING NOTES on minute 0:00 – 16:53

Introduction 

I. Literary Structure 

      A. Flood of Deliverance 

  	1. Initial Covenant 

  	2. Enduring Covenant 

  	3. Escape from Water 

  	4. Exit to Dry Land 

  	5. Divine Remembrance 

      B. New Order 

  	1. Sons of Noah 

  	2. Defeat of Babel 



## REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. Explain how Dr. Pratt divides Genesis 6:9-11:9 and name the divisions.

2. Why did God choose to destroy the human race with the flood?

3. What two covenants did God make with Noah? What was the sign of the second covenant?

4. Explain why Ham's son Canaan was cursed by Noah.

5. Explain the areas populated by the descendants of each of Noah's sons.

6. Why did God punish the people for building the tower of Babel?

7. How did God punish them?
